OntoBoard 1.101.0 - host smoke receipt

Produced by tools/smoke.ps1 -SelfTest.

  2026-10-08  Protege 5.6.9  OWL API 4.5.29  JRE Temurin 11.0.25  -Xmx500M  PASS  check 9/9  test 10/10
  2026-10-08  Protege 5.5.0  OWL API 4.5.9   JRE 1.8.0_121        -Xmx500M  PASS  check 9/9  test 10/10


PROPOSING THE CHANGE, WITHOUT LEAVING PROTEGE

Roadmap item 1, and the last gap in the git surface. Git... has done status, stage, commit,
pull, push and branch since 1.19.0 and Open from GitHub... clones, so the only step still sending
a curator to a browser was the one that ends the work: asking for it to be merged.

Project > Pull request... lists what is open on the repository - number, state, title, branch,
author, each with its URL - and opens one for the branch you are on, with a title, a description,
a base and a draft flag.

IT RUNS gh, AND STORES NOTHING

The same decision as everywhere else here: ROBOT runs as robot-core in process, a build runs as
make in ODK's own container, git runs as git. A pull request needs an authenticated GitHub
session, and gh already holds one - in the system keyring, put there by `gh auth login`, scoped
by the user who ran it.

The alternative was to ask for a personal access token and keep it, which would make this plugin
a place credentials live, and a worse place than the one that already exists. That is the whole
argument, and it is why there is no settings page for this.

NOTHING IS PROPOSED WITHOUT BEING SHOWN FIRST

Opening a pull request is the one operation in OntoBoard that other people see the moment it
happens: it sends mail, it appears on a board, it asks for somebody's time. Three gates, ordered
so the cheapest failure comes first.

  1. The branch has to be proposable. A detached HEAD, the base branch itself and an unpushed
     branch each get their own sentence - gh's own error for all three is about refs and does not
     say which happened.
  2. `gh pr create --dry-run` validates the branch, the base and the remote WITHOUT creating
     anything. The flag exists; this did not have to be approximated.
  3. The exact command is shown and nothing runs until it is approved. Not a description of the
     command - the command, so that what is agreed to and what happens are the same text. The
     same rule Run a project script... follows, for the same reason.

WITHOUT gh THERE IS STILL AN ANSWER

Not installed and not logged in are different problems with different remedies, and are reported
as such: one says to get it from cli.github.com, the other says to run `gh auth login` once. Both
also give GitHub's own compare URL for the branch, which opens the "open a pull request" form
with no install and no login at all.

It is the one place in this plugin where leaving Protege is the honest recommendation, and the
link is better than an apology.

A DEFECT THE TESTS CAUGHT IN MY OWN CODE

compareUrl assumed GitHubUrl.parse returns null for a non-GitHub address. It throws - because its
other caller is a dialog where a user typed the address and wants to be told. A project hosted on
GitLab would therefore have thrown IllegalArgumentException out of the fallback and into the
action, at exactly the moment the fallback existed to help. Caught rather than pre-checked, since
the one authority on what GitHub accepts is that method.

THE PARSER IS TESTED AGAINST WHAT gh ACTUALLY PRINTS

The fixture is real output, kept verbatim, from

    gh pr list --repo INCATools/ontology-development-kit --json number,title,state,...

and it carries two things a parser written against a guessed shape gets wrong: `author` is a
nested object, and the fields arrive in alphabetical order rather than the order they were asked
for. A parser that split on every brace would end a pull request at the author's closing one and
lose every field after it - which, alphabetically, is all of them.

The JSON is read by hand rather than by a library, for the reason the rest of this plugin embeds
what it needs: the bundle already carries ROBOT and its dependencies, and adding a parser to read
eight fields of a document this code specified the shape of is weight for nothing.

WHAT IS STILL THE BROWSER'S JOB

Reviewing. Reading a diff, leaving review comments and merging are a larger piece of work, and
for an ontology a line diff of RDF/XML is not the diff anybody wants - ROBOT > Compare releases...
is, and it already exists. The limitations page now says reviewing rather than pull requests.

NUMBERS

1893 tests, 0 failures. 21 new, all of PullRequest's command building and parsing.

A note on the skip. A full `mvn clean test` reports 1 skipped and a full `mvn test` reports 0:
BundleConfigurationTest's manifest check needs a built jar and `clean` has just deleted it. Run
after packaging, it runs - verified against the real 1.101.0 bundle, 16 tests, 0 skipped. It is
structural rather than a test quietly not running.

39/39 classes named in plugin.xml load on both hosts - 38 before this, plus PullRequestAction.
Quality report end to end: 6 findings, 2 of them errors. 163 patterns indexed.

The operation is not exercised by the host self-test: it would open a pull request on somebody's
repository, which a startup check must never do. What is covered is every command it builds and
every output it reads, by twenty-one unit tests needing no network, no GitHub account and no
process.

STILL OPEN

Widoco, entity locking, the axiom kinds live collaboration cannot carry, and src/metadata - all
four being surveyed against the real code as this ships. release_artefacts and primary_release
remain unread. And the pattern library still knows nothing about what you have already imported.
