OntoBoard 1.103.0 - host smoke receipt

Produced by tools/smoke.ps1 -SelfTest.

  2026-10-08  Protege 5.6.9  OWL API 4.5.29  JRE Temurin 11.0.25  -Xmx500M  PASS  check 9/9  test 10/10
  2026-10-08  Protege 5.5.0  OWL API 4.5.9   JRE 1.8.0_121        -Xmx500M  PASS  check 9/9  test 10/10


THE DOCUMENTATION PAGE, WITHOUT PUSHING AND WAITING

Roadmap item 2. An ODK project publishes an HTML page generated from its ontology's own
annotations, and the three real projects that publish one do it with a hand-written CI job - so
the only way to see what the page would look like was to push and wait for the deploy.

Project > Documentation... runs Widoco on the release product and opens the result.

INSTALLED RATHER THAN EMBEDDED, AND THAT IS MEASURED

Widoco is not on Maven Central at all, so there is no coordinate to depend on. Its only
published form is a shaded jar of 40,858,575 bytes, and inside it:

    org/semanticweb/owlapi/**   1,533 entries
    com/google/common/**        2,044 entries

Both are packages this bundle imports from the host. A second copy of either inside an OSGi
bundle is how it stops resolving. So Widoco is found rather than carried, the way Konclude has
been since 1.94.0, and the dialog names the asset and the release URL when it cannot find one.

AND IT NEEDS JAVA 11, WHICH ONE OF THE TWO HOSTS DOES NOT HAVE

The jar is compiled to class file version 55. Measured on both:

    Protege 5.6.9   Temurin 11.0.25   runs it with its own JVM
    Protege 5.5.0   1.8.0_121         cannot - another JDK has to be pointed at

So the action resolves a Java rather than assuming one, reports which it found and what version
it printed, and refuses with a sentence naming the host and the class file version instead of
letting the JVM print an UnsupportedClassVersionError nobody can act on.

THREE THINGS A PLAN GOT WRONG, AND RUNNING IT CAUGHT

The implementation was planned from reading rather than running, and the plan asserted three
things about Widoco's behaviour. All three were checked by downloading the jar and running it
against MWO's mwo.owl, and all three were wrong or incomplete.

THE PAGE IS NOT IN A doc/ SUBFOLDER. With -outFolder given it is written to
<out>/index-<lang>.html directly - measured at 854,425 bytes. Looking for <out>/doc/index-en.html
would have reported failure on every successful run. Widoco does create doc/ when no output
folder is given, which is presumably where the belief came from.

A SUCCESSFUL RUN DOES NOT PRINT HUNDREDS OF ERRORS. It printed 27 lines, of which the warnings
were a missing config/config.properties and two SAX parser properties the bundled Xerces does
not recognise. Treating warnings as failure would reject every run there is.

THE CONFIGURATION IS FOUND BESIDE THE JAR, NOT THE WORKING DIRECTORY. This one corrected me
rather than the plan: the javadoc I wrote said the working directory decides, and running the
process from one directory with the jar in another showed Widoco still looking for config/ next
to the jar. Setting the working directory does not help a user who wrote a configuration.

WHAT THE RUN DID ESTABLISH, WHICH IS WHY SUCCESS IS NOT THE EXIT CODE

The same run exited 0 while printing

    ERROR widoco.WidocoUtils - Failed to download vocabulary in RDF format
    ERROR widoco.CreateResources - Could not generate changelog

Widoco tried to fetch the previous release to diff against, could not, and carried on without
the changelog section - a complete page with a piece quietly missing. So the page is checked for
directly and its size tested, and the log lines worth reading are reported beside it while the
two Xerces warnings are dropped.

THE RELEASE PRODUCT, NOT THE EDIT FILE

An edit file imports its modules rather than containing them, so a page made from it covers the
terms the project wrote and none it reuses - and the version IRI Release... stamps is not in it
yet. The open ontology is offered as a preview of unreleased work, with a warning that says so.

Output goes to build/documentation rather than docs/, because docs/ is published and a generated
page landing there would be committed by accident.

NUMBERS

1930 tests, 0 failures. 19 new.

Verified end to end rather than only in unit tests: the command this plugin builds was run
against the real jar through Protege 5.6.9's own JVM, and the page landed exactly where
indexIn() said it would. That check is what caught the doc/ mistake; no unit test could have.

41/41 classes named in plugin.xml load on both hosts. Quality report end to end: 6 findings, 2
of them errors. 163 patterns indexed.

The operation is not exercised by the host self-test: it needs a 39 MB jar this plugin does not
ship, and a startup check must not depend on something the user may not have installed.

STILL OPEN

Entity locking, which will be advisory rather than enforced - Protege owns the edit model, so a
lock OntoBoard cannot enforce should not claim to be one. And the collaboration vocabulary,
whose plan was rejected on review and needs rescoping: the measured counts say equivalence and
disjointness are the whole of the practical loss, while three of the nine kinds the docs listed
occur zero times in three real ontologies.
