OntoBoard 1.106.0 - host smoke receipt

Produced by tools/smoke.ps1 -SelfTest.

  2026-10-08  Protege 5.6.9  OWL API 4.5.29  JRE Temurin 11.0.25  -Xmx500M  PASS  check 9/9  test 10/10
  2026-10-08  Protege 5.5.0  OWL API 4.5.9   JRE 1.8.0_121        -Xmx500M  PASS  check 9/9  test 10/10


TESTED AGAINST SOMEBODY ELSE'S REAL SPREADSHEET, AND IT BROKE

Everything in this release came out of pointing the ROBOT template support at a working
26-sheet knowledge graph instead of at its own fixtures. The MatWerk KG is built from one
published Google Sheet by an Airflow DAG that runs, per sheet,

    robot merge --include-annotations true -i <upstream>.owl \
          template --merge-before --template <sheet>.tsv --output <sheet>.owl
    robot explain --reasoner hermit -M inconsistency

and refuses the sheet unless the explanation reads exactly "No explanations found." Its
merge-chain depth reaches 8 and one of its tabs is 5,097 lines.

ONE BAD CELL DISCARDED THE WHOLE SHEET

An `I` column is one whose cells name another term - `I http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/RO_0001025`
for "located in". It is what a knowledge graph is mostly made of: six of twelve columns in that
project's `organization` sheet are `I` columns, and eight of twelve in `dataportal`.

robot-core 1.9.8 raises a bare NullPointerException("object cannot be null") for a cell in such
a column that is neither an IRI, nor a CURIE with a known prefix, nor the label of a term that
exists. It raises it in partial mode as well as strict - and partial mode is the entire basis of
this plugin's "report every problem, keep every good row" behaviour. So TemplateSheet fell
through to its last-resort branch and returned no ontology at all.

Measured on nine good rows and one typo:

    before   ontology: none. problems: 1, attached to no row and no column,
             reading "object cannot be null".
    after    ontology: 36 axioms, all nine rows. problems: 1, reading
             row 12, column "Host institute": Nothing in this ontology is called
             "Fraunhofer-Gesellschafft", so there is no term for this column to point
             at. The column is "I ex:hostedBy", which holds a reference to a term: an
             IRI, a CURIE such as obo:BFO_0000001, or the exact label of a term that
             already exists - here, in an import, or in another row of this sheet.

Rows are now built one at a time and repeatedly, so a row may still point at a term another row
introduces; the passes stop when one gets nowhere.

THE FIRST VERSION OF THE FIX BLAMED THE WRONG COLUMN

Worth recording, because it would have shipped as a verified improvement. The offending cell is
found by experiment on the row rather than by reasoning about ROBOT's rules. The first attempt
looked for a cell which, when emptied, let the row build - and reported the TYPE column of a row
whose fault was four columns further along. A row with no TYPE creates no individual, so the
offending assertion is never attempted and the row "builds" by doing nothing.

A cell is now blamed only when the evidence runs both ways: the row still fails with that cell
alone in place, AND builds when that cell alone is removed. theColumnAtFaultIsTheOneNamedAndNotTheTypeColumn
keeps it that way. A precise, confident, wrong finding is worse than the vague one it replaced.

THE BLAST RADIUS WAS MEASURED, NOT ASSUMED

Of the column types a sheet can use, one good row plus one unresolvable reference gives:

    I <prop>              lost the whole sheet   ->  now survives, problem placed
    I <prop> SPLIT=,      lost the whole sheet   ->  now survives, problem placed
    AI, TI, SC %, EC %, C %, A      unaffected either way

So the fix is scoped to a real set rather than to the one case that was noticed. Six tests, all
of which fail without the change, each with the symptom above.

A QUESTION THAT NOW HAS A MEASURED ANSWER

tools/shared-shapes.py is new, and exists because "extract the patterns several ontologies
share" needs a prior question answered: is there anything there? Run over the three projects
this plugin is developed against, on their own authored artefacts rather than their complete
ones:

    nfdicore-base.ttl    1,506 triples     22 restriction shapes
    mwo-base.ttl           514 triples      4 restriction shapes
    pmdco-base.ttl       8,627 triples    236 restriction shapes
    shared by all three: 0

Zero. On the -full artefacts the same three share 23, and 19 of those have a BFO property and a
BFO filler - they arrive with the imports. So an extractor that mined the complete files and
matched axioms would report twenty-three shared "patterns", every one an artefact of a shared
import. These three do reach the same shapes - the role pattern is in all of them - but through
different vocabulary, and exact IRI matching cannot see it.

That is a finding about the research direction rather than a feature, which is why it ships as a
tool that reprints it rather than as a menu item.

NUMBERS

1962 tests, 0 failures, 1 skipped. 6 new, all in TemplateSheetTest, which goes from 18 to 24.
No main-source visibility was widened for them.

41/41 classes named in plugin.xml load on both hosts. 163 patterns indexed. Quality report end
to end: 6 findings, 2 of them errors.

On 5.5.0, cellfie-2.2.4 and swrltab-plugin-2.1.3 fail to install. Neither is ours and neither is
new; the receipt records them because a broken neighbour can change what resolves.

STILL OPEN

The collaboration vocabulary, whose plan was rejected on review: equivalence and disjointness
are the whole of the practical loss, and carrying them is a two-sided protocol change that needs
its own measured design.

Cross-sheet reference itself - a sheet resolving labels minted by another sheet - is not in this
release. The primitive is already present and one scope narrower: TemplateSheet feeds a sheet its
own output as context, which is why a row may point at a row below it. Widening that to a set of
sheets, and deriving the build order from the references instead of asking somebody to maintain
it by hand, is the next step and is specified by the measurements above rather than guessed.
