OntoBoard 1.102.0 - host smoke receipt

Produced by tools/smoke.ps1 -SelfTest.

  2026-10-08  Protege 5.6.9  OWL API 4.5.29  JRE Temurin 11.0.25  -Xmx500M  PASS  check 9/9  test 10/10
  2026-10-08  Protege 5.5.0  OWL API 4.5.9   JRE 1.8.0_121        -Xmx500M  PASS  check 9/9  test 10/10


A ROADMAP ITEM CLOSED BY MEASURING IT

src/metadata was on the roadmap as something to edit. Measuring it closed the item instead, and
produced a different feature that is worth more.

                    registry   PURL config   ontology IRI
  ECTO                 200         200       purl.obolibrary.org/obo
  NFDIcore             404         404       nfdi.fiz-karlsruhe.de
  MWO                  404         404       purls.helmholtz-metadaten.de
  PMDCO                404         404       w3id.org/pmd

Three of the four declare `base_url: /obo/<id>`, which configures a redirect under
purl.obolibrary.org - a namespace they do not own. For ECTO, which does, the committed copy has
already drifted from the deployed one (2 products against 3, and a lowercase example term), so
editing it locally reaches nobody either. The Foundry's intake is now a fifteen-field GitHub
issue form rather than these two files, and the directory is generator-owned: MWO's history
shows ODK putting all three back after a maintainer deleted them.

An editor for that would have made editing a dead file feel productive. The item is closed with
the numbers above beside it.

WHAT THE MEASURING FOUND INSTEAD

Every project carrying a registry entry contradicts its own ontology about the licence:

    license:
      url: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/
      label: CC-BY

while nfdicore.owl, mwo.owl and ecto.owl all annotate CC0 1.0. A file whose purpose is to state
the licence disagrees with the thing it describes, in all three. Also: three of four disagree on
the title between the ontology's annotation and the ODK YAML, and all four annotate a licence
their ODK YAML does not declare at all.

So Project > Check project metadata reports where a project's statements about itself disagree -
the ontology's own annotations, the ODK YAML, and the registry entry when there is one.

READ-ONLY, AND INVOKED RATHER THAN AUTOMATIC

It writes nothing. src/metadata is generator-owned, so an edit made there could be reverted by
the next update_repo without a trace, and the ODK YAML already has an editor in Project
configuration...

It is a menu item rather than a release gate or a startup check, because it will have something
to say about most real projects the first time it runs, and six findings arriving unasked before
a release is noise at the worst moment.

A DESIGN FLAW THE ADVERSARIAL REVIEW CAUGHT IN MY OWN PLAN

The first version had seven checks, four of which read src/metadata - the file the same check
reports as one nothing reads. Saying "nothing reads this" and then itemising six faults inside
it invites somebody to go and fix them, which is exactly the work the finding exists to prevent.

An inert registry now gets one finding saying it is inert. Its contents are only itemised when
the project really is in the OBO namespace the file configures. Two tests pin that, and the one
named anInertRegistryIsReportedOnceNotItemised fails if the gate is removed.

The checks on files the build DOES read - the ontology and the ODK YAML - always run.

TWO ERRORS IN THIS PROJECT'S OWN DOCUMENTATION, BOTH VERIFIED IN SOURCE

limitations.md said live collaboration carries "the seventeen operation types". It is eighteen:
OntologyOperation.TYPES, counted. collaboration.md had it right, so the two pages disagreed.

The same entry listed nine uncarried axiom kinds as equals. Counted in the real ontologies:

                          nfdicore   mwo   pmdco
    equivalence                 16    36     260
    disjointness                18    18      44
    owl:hasKey                   0     0       0
    negative assertions          0     0       0
    datatype definitions         0     0       0

Equivalence and disjointness are the whole of the practical loss. The three that read as serious
OWL gaps do not occur once. A list giving all nine equal weight misdirects whoever reads it -
including whoever decides what to implement next. It is a measured table now.

Also corrected: OperationMapper reaches an operation for exactly four axiom classes - checked,
four instanceof branches - which the entry now says rather than implying the eighteen operation
types correspond to eighteen kinds of axiom.

NUMBERS

1911 tests, 0 failures. 18 new. Six mutations applied to the new code, six caught.

The fixtures are the real files - nfdicore, mwo and ecto's src/metadata pairs - copied byte for
byte with their CRLF endings, because the claim this check rests on is that its findings fire on
real projects rather than on invented ones.

40/40 classes named in plugin.xml load on both hosts. Quality report end to end: 6 findings, 2
of them errors. 163 patterns indexed.

TWO OF MY OWN MISTAKES, BOTH CAUGHT BY TESTS THAT ALREADY EXISTED

A heredoc turned \n inside a Java string literal into a real newline, for the third time in this
project. docs/development.md has warned about it since 1.97.0 and it still happened; the fix is
to stop writing Java through the shell, which the Edit tool does.

MenuStructureTest refused "Check project metadata..." because the action has no configure() and
so acts immediately, and the convention is that only an entry opening a dialog ends in an
ellipsis. Renamed. Neither of these would have been caught by reading the diff.

STILL OPEN

Widoco, entity locking and the collaboration vocabulary, all three surveyed against the code as
this ships. Widoco cannot be embedded - it is not on Maven Central at all, and its only
distributed form is a 39 MB shaded jar carrying a second OWL API and a second Guava inside
packages this bundle imports from the host - so it will follow Konclude's pattern of a tool you
install and OntoBoard finds. Entity locking will be advisory rather than enforced, because
Protege owns the edit model. The collaboration-vocabulary plan was rejected on review and needs
rescoping before anything is built.
