OntoBoard 1.107.0 - host smoke receipt

Produced by tools/smoke.ps1 -SelfTest.

  2026-10-08  Protege 5.6.9  OWL API 4.5.29  JRE Temurin 11.0.25  -Xmx500M  PASS  check 9/9  test 10/10
  2026-10-08  Protege 5.5.0  OWL API 4.5.9   JRE 1.8.0_121        -Xmx500M  PASS  check 9/9  test 10/10


A RENAME PASTED FROM A SPREADSHEET BUILT AN IRI WITH A TAB IN IT

Found while six expert personas were walked through the plugin against the real ODK projects
on this machine. It is the most ordinary thing a person can do with that dialog, and it
corrupted the ontology without saying anything.

Rename terms... takes mappings one per line, as "old -> new" or separated by a tab. Both
splits took a limit of two, so anything after the second field stayed attached to it. A line
copied out of a spreadsheet with a third column - a note, a date, whoever decided it - arrived
as a target IRI containing a tab and a sentence.

Measured on the real code before the fix. Pasting

    http://example.org/o#old <TAB> http://example.org/o#new <TAB> renamed for clarity

gave a plan of exactly two changes:

    AddAxiom(Declaration(Class(<http://example.org/o#new    renamed for clarity>)))
    RemoveAxiom(Declaration(Class(<http://example.org/o#old>)))

with getUnmatched() empty and getEntitiesAffected() reporting 1. So the dialog called it a
clean rename of one term, while deleting the real term and declaring a class whose IRI cannot
be dereferenced, typed, or found again. Nothing between the paste and the ontology objected.

WHY WHITESPACE AND NOT IRI VALIDATION

One rule covers both modes. PREFIX mode takes the leading part of an IRI rather than a whole
one - "http://example.org/" is a legitimate value there and is not a valid IRI to parse - but
it cannot contain a space either. So the check is that neither side contains whitespace, which
is true of every IRI and of every IRI prefix.

The message names which side and which character, and says that a third column causes it.
"Is not a valid IRI" would send somebody looking at the IRI instead of at the column they
pasted, which is where the mistake actually is.

Four tests: the tab case, the same mistake written with an arrow, whitespace on the left-hand
side, and a prefix mapping that must still be accepted so the fix does not break the mode it
is not about.

A CORRECTION, RECORDED BECAUSE IT WAS NEARLY SHIPPED AS A FINDING

The 1.106.0 receipt describes testing against a real 26-sheet knowledge graph. In the course of
that this session also concluded that 17 cross-sheet references in that project's dataportal
sheet could not resolve, because the sheet's ROBOT call does not merge the sheet those labels
are declared in.

That was wrong, and the mechanism is worth writing down: `template --merge-before` writes the
merged input into its output, so a sheet's label scope is its whole transitive upstream chain
and not the sheets named on its own command line. All 17 resolve, through a sheet five steps
upstream that happens to hold 5,064 labels.

What is actually wrong there is subtler and was found by the same measurement. 57 institute
labels are declared in two different sheets; 55 agree on an IRI and 2 do not. "National
Institute for Materials Science (NIMS)" has two distinct IRIs in scope and nine of those
seventeen references point at that label. A further 23 labels are ambiguous within one upstream
sheet alone - VTK, LAMMPS, ASE, "crystal plasticity", "atomistic simulations" each carry two
IRIs. So a cross-sheet label reference resolves to whichever IRI ROBOT picks, with no warning
and no say for the author.

Nothing in this release acts on that; it is recorded because it changes what the template
feature has to do. Reporting an ambiguous label with every candidate IRI and the sheet each
came from is now a requirement with evidence behind it, where "cannot resolve" was a
requirement with a mistake behind it.

NUMBERS

1966 tests, 0 failures. 4 new, all in TermRenameTest, which goes from 8 to 12. The
before-measurement is in the entry above rather than in a reverted test run: the defect was
reproduced against the shipped code first, which is stronger evidence than a test that fails
when a guard is removed.

41/41 classes named in plugin.xml load on both hosts. 163 patterns indexed. Quality report end
to end: 6 findings, 2 of them errors.

On 5.5.0, cellfie-2.2.4 and swrltab-plugin-2.1.3 fail to install. Neither is ours and neither
is new; the receipt records them because a broken neighbour can change what resolves.

STILL OPEN

Everything the persona walkthroughs turned up beyond this one fix, which is a list to be
triaged rather than a backlog to be worked: no cross-ontology mapping support of any kind
(verified - no SSSOM, no skos:exactMatch, no hasDbXref; the only oboInOwl use is obsoletion),
no DOSDP support while ECTO ships 31 DOSDP templates, no way to find a term by its label rather
than its IRI, and Import terms... rewriting a term list from its argument where its own javadoc
says re-running is how the list grows.

The collaboration vocabulary, whose plan was rejected on review.
