OntoBoard 1.104.0 - host smoke receipt

Produced by tools/smoke.ps1 -SelfTest.

  2026-10-08  Protege 5.6.9  OWL API 4.5.29  JRE Temurin 11.0.25  -Xmx500M  PASS  check 9/9  test 10/10
  2026-10-08  Protege 5.5.0  OWL API 4.5.9   JRE 1.8.0_121        -Xmx500M  PASS  check 9/9  test 10/10


SEEING WHO IS EDITING WHAT - AND NOT CALLING IT A LOCK

Roadmap item 3 was "entity locking: nothing stops two live collaborators editing the same term
at once". That is true, and nothing in this plugin can change it. Protege owns the edit model -
a change happens through its views, its undo stack and its keyboard, and OntoBoard hears about
it afterwards. A lock it could not enforce would be worse than none, because somebody would
rely on it.

So the item is answered rather than built. A peer who has changed an axiom on a term within the
last five minutes is shown as editing it: "Bob is editing Calzone". That is the whole of what is
deliverable from this position, and it prevents the collision the only way anything here can -
by telling you in time.

THREE PROPERTIES THAT MAKE IT TRUSTWORTHY, EACH WITH A TEST THAT FAILS WITHOUT IT

OBSERVED, NOT DECLARED. The claim is made by actually editing - CollabSession calls it as it
publishes the operation it has just mapped - rather than by announcing an intention. Nothing to
switch on and nothing to remember to release.

IT DIES WITH ITS HOLDER. It rides the presence heartbeat, which expires after ten seconds, so a
peer who closes Protege, loses the network or crashes stops claiming anything. Structural rather
than handled: a lock outliving its holder is the failure that makes locking hated, and riding
presence makes it impossible rather than merely unlikely.

IT EXPIRES IN PLACE. Five minutes after the last edit, so a window left open over lunch stops
speaking for somebody.

SELECTION IS NOT EDITING. What a peer clicked already travelled and is already drawn as a ring.
Treating it as a claim would make every click look like an edit and the signal worthless. The
mutation that swaps one for the other fails two tests.

TWO DEFECTS THE IMPLEMENTATION FOUND THAT THE PLAN HAD NOT

THE HEARTBEAT WOULD HAVE FROZEN THE CLAIM. CollabClient kept lastPresenceFrame - a composed
string, resent unchanged every few seconds. That was fine while presence carried only a cursor
and wrong the moment it carried a claim: a frame built at the instant of an edit and resent
would have announced "still editing Calzone" for as long as the session lasted, because nothing
would ever rebuild it. Presence now keeps its parts and recomposes on every beat, asking the
claim whether it is still live, so the five-minute hold expires at the holder rather than only
at the viewer.

IT IS A TWO-SIDED CHANGE, WHICH THE PLAN HAD NOT SAID. The bridge validates a presence loosely -
it only requires numeric x and y - but relays it by copying named fields:

    peer.x = message.x;
    peer.y = message.y;
    peer.selection = message.selection || null;

and livePeers then rebuilds each peer as a fresh object from a fixed list of six. A new field
passes validation, is dropped on receipt, and dropped again on broadcast. The bridge's own
comments record exactly this happening to `ontology`, where "every peer's ontology arrived
empty". Both sides are changed, and the test that covers it reads bridge.mjs and asserts both
lines, because it is one bug and not two.

Verified against the running bridge rather than by inspection: a peer with a claim round-trips
through livePeers, and a peer that never set one comes back as "" rather than undefined. The
bridge's own 71 tests pass unchanged.

AN OLDER BRIDGE SHOWS NO BADGES RATHER THAN WRONG ONES

The claim is omitted from the message entirely when there is none, so an older bridge sees
exactly what it always saw. When a field it does not relay arrives, it is dropped and the peer
reads as editing nothing - and absence is treated as no information rather than as "nobody is
editing", so it shows no badge instead of an "unlocked" one.

NUMBERS

1950 tests, 0 failures. 20 new. Seven mutations applied to the claim and the marker, seven
caught - including a claim that outlives its holder, selection counted as editing, and the
sentence saying "has locked".

41/41 classes named in plugin.xml load on both hosts. Quality report end to end: 6 findings, 2
of them errors. 163 patterns indexed. The bridge's own suite: 71 passed.

The claim is not exercised by the host self-test, which runs one Protege against no server.
What is covered is the expiry arithmetic, the wire format in both directions, the marker, and
the sentence - by twenty unit tests needing no socket - plus the live-socket collaboration
tests, which pass unchanged.

STILL OPEN

The collaboration vocabulary, whose first plan was rejected on review for resting on a
justification the code contradicted. The measured position: OperationMapper reaches an operation
for four axiom classes, and of the nine kinds the documentation used to list as equals,
owl:hasKey, negative assertions and datatype definitions occur zero times across NFDIcore, MWO
and PMDCO while equivalence occurs 312 times and disjointness 80. Equivalence and disjointness
are the whole of the practical loss, and that is where any work should go.
