OntoBoard 1.100.0 - host smoke receipt

Produced by tools/smoke.ps1 -SelfTest.

  2026-10-08  Protege 5.6.9  OWL API 4.5.29  JRE Temurin 11.0.25  -Xmx500M  PASS  check 9/9  test 10/10
  2026-10-08  Protege 5.5.0  OWL API 4.5.9   JRE 1.8.0_121        -Xmx500M  PASS  check 9/9  test 10/10


IMPORT TERMS... DECLARES WHAT IT BUILT

1.99.0 taught Refresh imports to read import_group.products and, in doing so, made OntoBoard
report a defect of its own: OdkScaffold writes

    import_group:
      products: []

into every project the plugin generates, and ROBOT > Import terms... wrote the module, the term
list and the catalog entry without ever adding the product. A repository built entirely with this
plugin therefore had imports ODK's own build did not know about - IMPORTS empty, and
`make refresh-imports` in somebody's CI rebuilding nothing, silently.

It declares the product now. termText is unchanged, so the import still brings in what it always
did; this adds the line that makes the build aware of it.

THE METHOD IS WRITTEN OUT EVEN WHEN IT IS THE DEFAULT

A BOT extraction could leave module_type and module_type_slme unsaid, since BOT is what a product
inherits. That would be wrong: a project whose import_group sets module_type_slme: STAR at the
group level would rebuild the module as STAR, which is not what was extracted. Saying it is the
only way the declaration stays true of the file beside it, and there is a test named for exactly
that.

slme_individuals is deliberately absent. ODK's group default is include, and robot-core's
ExtractOperation.getDefaultOptions() - which is what this plugin's extraction runs with - reports
individuals=include. They already agree, so writing it would add a line that says nothing.

MIREOT is declared module_type: custom, with the reason on screen. ODK has no module type that
means MIREOT, so there is nothing truthful to write that `make` would act on; custom is ODK's own
word for a rule written by hand, which is the situation, and is what NFDIcore does for its own
MIREOT import.

SEEDING AN EMPTY LIST, WHICH 1.97.0 REFUSED

appendTo refuses an empty sequence, and OntoBoard's scaffold writes exactly one - so refusing it
meant refusing every project this plugin made, which is the only place the first product would
ever be added.

The 1.97.0 reason turns out to be two things conflated. It said an empty sequence is written both
as `key: []` and as a key with nothing under it, needing different edits. Those are not both empty
sequences: measured, `products:` with nothing under it parses as NULL, not as a list, and is still
refused here by the same "is not a list" check. `[]` is the only genuinely empty sequence, and
replacing that token is unambiguous.

Indentation is still copied from the list's own last item wherever there is one. Only for `[]` -
where there is nothing to copy and the file is one OntoBoard wrote - is it computed, as the key's
indent plus two.

A DEFECT THAT PASSED THE OBVIOUS CASE AND BROKE FOUR REAL ONES

The first appendBlockTo used snakeyaml's end mark for the last item. A mapping inside a sequence
ends, as far as snakeyaml is concerned, where the FOLLOWING structure begins - so for the last
item that mark sits past the blank line after it and inside whatever top-level key comes next.
Splicing there put a new import product after NFDIcore's `components:` and after MWO's
`remove_owl_nothing: TRUE`, and the result was not YAML at all.

Four of the five real spellings broke. It is the same trap removeFrom documents from the other
direction, and the code comment I had written claimed the opposite. The item's own text is now
measured by indentation: its first line, then every following line indented deeper than the dash.

Verified against every spelling in the wild - NFDIcore's three-space key with four-space items,
MWO's two-space key with three-space items, ECTO's bare `- id:` entries, a list ending at the last
line of the file, a trailing comment on the item above, and the scaffold's own `products: []`.
Each one reparses, and each keeps its own indentation.

THE CANVAS FRAME, REPORTED AS "SO COMPACT AND LOTS OF CONCEPTS ARE PACKED"

Two causes, and the second is the one that mattered.

SPACING. GAP was 28 and PADDING 34, giving a 188x88 node stride. Every other placement on the
board uses 200x100 - CanvasLayouts' GRID_GAP 40, LOOSE_PITCH_X/Y 200/100, NODE_PITCH 200,
RING_GAP 200 - so the imported frame was the only one tighter than the rest, and the only one off
the canvas's 20px snap grid, so a pattern's nodes lined up with nothing and jumped the first time
one was dragged. Now 40/40/40, with tests asserting the stride and the grid rather than the
constant, because a test on the constant would pass if somebody changed the node size instead.

WHAT WAS ACTUALLY PACKED. 44% of the boxes were not concepts. The 163 shipped patterns declare
1318 classes and 1054 properties, and every term became a 160x60 box - while OntologyProjection
already draws each property as an arrow between the classes it relates. The same fact was being
shown twice and the grid was nearly doubled. Only classes are framed now; the import is untouched,
so every selected term still reaches the ontology. The median pattern drops from 11 boxes at
840x380 to 6 at 640x280.

Three other candidate causes were refuted on inspection, one of which would have made things
worse: raising NODE_W to 220 exceeds the 200 pitch every arrangement uses, and capturePositions
persists the width, so the next Arrange would overlap nodes by 20px.

THE SLIDE DECK WAS BUILT AND UNREACHABLE

tools/build-deck.py was committed in 8afc547 and build/playground-ontoboard.pptx was not: the
.gitignore excludes build/*.pptx, nothing in docs or CI referenced it, and the only copy was on
the machine that made it. The builder shipped and the deck did not.

The release workflow builds it now and publishes it beside the jar, with a guard that opens the
result and fails on a deck that lost slides or gained a blank one - checked in both directions,
against the real deck and against a deliberately blanked copy. deck-requirements.txt pins what it
needs. There is a download button on Getting started.

It also grew from 28 slides to 33, following playground.pptx where this deck had gaps: that deck
spends four slides on the workspace, six on the ontology directory and seven on a custom import,
and this one went from "create a repository" straight to "run the features".

AND A DEFECT IN THE DECK FOUND BY RENDERING IT AND LOOKING

Every two-line centred caption was ragged - "design patterns," hard left, "ready to import" hard
right, on the slide anybody opens first. Setting run.text to a string containing a newline puts a
line break inside the paragraph, and the alignment then applied to the first line only. One
paragraph per line now. It was pre-existing and deck-wide.

DOCUMENTATION: 1111 LINES TO 244

limitations.md was 1111 lines, and its "Known constraints" section was 924 of them in 40 entries -
of which 30 entries and 861 lines announce a defect fixed in a named version. A reader opening
Limitations to find out what the tool cannot do met 861 lines of history before the 61 that answer
the question. Those 30 moved to fixed.md; every one of the original 943 non-blank lines was
checked present in one of the two files afterwards.

The nav went from 25 entries to 12: ten internal spec and plan documents were listed as "Design
record", which made the site look like a planning archive that happens to contain a plugin. They
are still published and still linked; they are not in the sidebar.

Two sections were audited against the code rather than edited: the src/ workspace, where three of
the four directories are driven from the menu and src/metadata is not (now roadmap item 5), and
the ontology directory, where the one undocumented item was `make update_repo` - OntoBoard's
equivalent is Update project files..., and each tool refuses to regenerate the other's project.

TWO STALE NUMBERS CORRECTED AT THE SOURCE

OdkRegenerator's javadoc said MWO's Makefile is 767 lines carrying fifteen ODK markers. Measured
today: 754 lines, and ODK_VERSION_MAKEFILE appears twice, against none in a scaffolded project,
which has no run.sh either. The javadoc and the documentation now say what was measured, without a
line count that will drift again.

NUMBERS

1872 tests, 0 failures, 0 skipped. 26 new, counted three ways and agreeing.

Eight mutations were applied to appendBlockTo and all eight were caught, including the end-mark
defect, which fails 16 of 16. Six were applied to the import-product reader and audit, and all six
were caught.

38/38 classes named in plugin.xml load on both hosts. Quality report end to end: 6 findings, 2 of
them errors. 163 patterns indexed.

A FAILURE THAT WAS NOT ONE, RECORDED BECAUSE THE SYMPTOM LOOKS NOTHING LIKE THE CAUSE

A full suite reported three failures in the pattern library - index.tsv stale, a pattern with
three classes instead of five, a collection total one too high - with not one pattern file changed
on disk. All twenty-seven passed run alone. Two Maven runs had been sharing target/: a background
full suite and a foreground -Dtest= run, each copying resources into target/classes while the
other read them. docs/development.md now says so beside the existing "always clean" note. A
failure that cannot be reproduced in isolation is this until proven otherwise.

ONTOINK 0.7.9

docs-requirements.txt is pinned to it. 0.7.9 fixes object and datatype properties being drawn and
labelled as individuals, which affected 1085 nodes across 147 of the 163 pattern pages this site
generates. Reported against the componency pattern, whose four object properties are declared
rdf:type owl:ObjectProperty in the file - the pattern was right and the visualisation was not.

STILL OPEN

Roadmap: pull requests, Widoco, entity locking, the nine axiom kinds live collaboration cannot
carry, and src/metadata. release_artefacts and primary_release remain unread - they mean three
content variants rather than three serialisations. And the pattern library still knows nothing
about what you have already imported, so a recommendation scoring 1.00 means you already contain
the whole pattern without saying so.
