OntoBoard 1.116.0 - host smoke receipt

Produced by tools/smoke.ps1 -SelfTest.

  2026-10-09  Protege 5.6.9  OWL API 4.5.29  JRE Temurin 11.0.25  -Xmx500M  PASS  check 9/9  test 10/10
  2026-10-09  Protege 5.5.0  OWL API 4.5.9   JRE 1.8.0_121        -Xmx500M  PASS  check 9/9  test 10/10


KONCLUDIX

Asked for, because the MatWerk pipeline already reasons with it rather than with Konclude.

Koncludix is a Konclude build from ISE-FIZKarlsruhe that adds one command, materialize, which
writes the complete inferred ABox in a single pass - transitively closed class and property
hierarchies, class assertions, object and data property assertions, and same-individual
equivalences - instead of making somebody run classification and realization separately and
join the results. Its documented invocation is

    Konclude-x86_64.AppImage input.ttl output.ttl
    docker run --rm -v "$PWD:/data" konclude materialize -w AUTO -i /data/in.ttl -o /data/out.ttl

which is the shape this plugin already builds: binary, command, -i, -o, -w AUTO. So supporting
it is one more Task and nothing else. Two things were checked rather than assumed before
writing it:

  - KoncludeInferences.read iterates every axiom and skips declarations and
    SubClassOf(X, owl:Thing); the only cast is guarded by an instanceof. So it reads class
    assertions, property assertions and same-individual without a change. Materialize output
    needed no new reader.
  - On Windows, Koncludix takes OWL2-XML or OWL2-Functional only - which is what this plugin
    writes for Konclude already.

The task carries the dependency in its own label - "Materialise everything (needs Koncludix)" -
because a task that silently needs a different binary is one somebody debugs against their
ontology. And a stock Konclude rejecting the command now gets a sentence saying so rather than
"unknown command" passed through, since that is the commonest way to meet this failure.

NOT VERIFIED END TO END, AND THAT MATTERS

There is no Koncludix on this machine - only a stock Konclude zip in Downloads - so what is
proven here is that the command line is built correctly, the task is offered, the reader
handles the axiom kinds materialize emits, and the plugin loads on both hosts. Whether a real
Koncludix binary accepts this exact invocation and whether its output parses has NOT been
tested, because testing it means downloading and running a third-party binary and that was not
asked for. The first person to point this at a Koncludix build is doing the real test.

NUMBERS

2138 tests, 0 failures. 2 new.

43/43 classes named in plugin.xml load on both hosts. 163 patterns indexed.

On 5.5.0, cellfie-2.2.4 and swrltab-plugin-2.1.3 fail to install. Neither is ours.

STILL OPEN

Reading .xlsx. Opening a folder, editing a cell and saving in a running Protege by a person.
