OntoBoard 1.112.0 - host smoke receipt

Produced by tools/smoke.ps1 -SelfTest.

  2026-10-09  Protege 5.6.9  OWL API 4.5.29  JRE Temurin 11.0.25  -Xmx500M  PASS  check 9/9  test 10/10
  2026-10-09  Protege 5.5.0  OWL API 4.5.9   JRE 1.8.0_121        -Xmx500M  PASS  check 9/9  test 10/10

5.5.0's line was read out of the log rather than from the script's own verdict, and that is
worth saying plainly. The run completed and the log holds every line the script checks for:

    Plugin: OntoBoard (1.112.0)
    menu classes resolve - 43/43 classes named in plugin.xml loaded
    self-check: PASS 9/9
    self-test: PASS - 10 of 10 checks ran

but smoke.ps1 did not return afterwards and was killed twice at its timeout, with no java
process left running either time. The product passed; the harness hung after it. Not
investigated here beyond confirming no Protege process survived, and it should be - a smoke
script that cannot be trusted to terminate is a smoke script somebody stops running.


THE GRID

The sheet work since 1.109.0 has all been model: open a folder, edit it, audit it, correct it
in bulk, create a thing it refers to, record who did it, write it back - every bit of it tested
headlessly and none of it reachable except through a read-only report. This is the surface.

THE HEADER ROWS ARE THE HEADER, NOT THE FIRST TWO ROWS

A ROBOT template's first two rows are not data: row 1 is the author's headings and row 2 says
what each column means. Putting them in the grid invites somebody to sort them into the middle
of the sheet, and a sorted template is a template that stops building. So the grid holds data
only, starting at the sheet's row 3, and the two header rows become the column header - the
heading above the spec, which is also the only arrangement in which both are visible.

SheetTableModel converts between the two numbering schemes, and every message uses the sheet's
own, because that is the number the person can see in their spreadsheet.

COMPLETION WHERE IT BELONGS AND NOWHERE ELSE

A column whose cells name another term gets an editable combo offering names from every open
sheet and from the ontology. A column holding text gets a plain field. Completing a label
column would be wrong: the text there is the value, not a reference - and a test asserts that
asking for completions on one returns nothing.

The combo stays editable so a name nobody has used yet can be typed, which is the case that
leads to creating it. A closed dropdown would make the 123 unresolved references on the real
sheets impossible to enter in the first place.

MARKED CELLS

A cell the audit has something to say about is tinted and carries the finding as its tooltip,
with the correction appended when there is one. Two shades, because the actions differ: pale
yellow for something that can be corrected automatically, pale pink for something needing a
person. Pale on purpose - on a sheet where a fifth of the cells carry a finding, a strong
colour makes the grid unreadable.

THE PICTURE CAUGHT WHAT THE ASSERTIONS DID NOT

The best argument for rendering the thing. Every test passed, including one asserting that each
header contains its heading and is two lines - and the rendered image showed the City column's
second line clipped to "I" and the Website column's to "AT". The two columns whose behaviour
that line exists to explain were the two saying nothing.

The cause is that an IRI does not fit: `I http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/RO_0001025` is 43
characters, and a column wide enough for it makes the grid unusable. So the spec is shown with
its IRIs shortened to their last segment - `I RO_0001025`, `AT IAO_0000235^^xsd:anyURI` - and
the full text stays in the header's tooltip. A CURIE is already short and is left alone.

There is now an assertion that no header wants more width than its column has, which is the
decidable form of what the picture showed.

The image lands in target/design/sheet-editor.png, beside the canvas and dialog proofs.

A FAILURE THAT WAS NOT ONE

Worth recording because it cost a verification round. A full run reported
PatternIndexTest.theShippedIndexMatchesTheDirectories as "patterns/index.tsv is stale" - a
failure in a directory this release does not touch. Checked rather than assumed: git reports
nothing changed under patterns/, and the test passes in isolation, and a second clean full run
passes. It is the concurrent-Maven artefact documented in development.md, caused here by a
targeted run overlapping the full one. One Maven at a time.

THE VIEW IT LIVES IN

SheetEditorView is the wiring, and deliberately thin: every action is one call into a tested
class - SheetBook for the edits, SheetAudit for the marks, SheetFix for the corrections,
TermCreation for a new row, SheetProvenance for who did it - so what is left is a file chooser
and some buttons. Open a folder, edit, add and duplicate and delete rows, fill down, undo,
check, apply a whole kind of correction in one step, record who did it, save. Right-clicking a
marked cell offers its correction, offers to create the thing it refers to, and explains why it
is marked.

It sits as a second tab beside Schema Canvas in the OntoBoard tab rather than in a column of
its own: they are alternatives, and halving the width would leave both cramped. ViewConfigTest
pins that, because splitting them into two CNodes is the obvious thing for whoever edits the
layout next to do.

Nothing is written until Save. These files are in git and somebody else is editing them.

NUMBERS

2124 tests, 0 failures. 17 new - 16 for the grid, of which one renders, and one pinning the
tab layout.

43/43 classes named in plugin.xml load on both hosts, up from 42. 163 patterns indexed. Quality report end
to end: 6 findings, 2 of them errors.

On 5.5.0, cellfie-2.2.4 and swrltab-plugin-2.1.3 fail to install. Neither is ours.

STILL OPEN

The self-test opens the OntoBoard tab and reports "[SchemaCanvasView] built without throwing" -
the canvas only, because Protege constructs the visible tab and not the one behind it. So the
sheet editor's construction inside a real Protege is NOT yet covered by the host smoke, which
is the one oracle that has historically caught what the suite could not. That is the next thing
to fix, and until it is, this release's claim about the editor rests on headless tests alone.

Opening a folder, editing and saving have not been exercised by a person in a running Protege
either.

The starter template still produces zero axioms on every real project.
