OntoBoard 1.54.0 - host smoke receipt

Produced by tools/smoke.ps1 -SelfTest.

  2026-09-26  Protege 5.6.9  OWL API 4.5.29  JRE Temurin 11.0.25  -Xmx500M  PASS  check 8/8  test 9/9
  2026-09-26  Protege 5.5.0  OWL API 4.5.9   JRE 1.8.0_121        -Xmx500M  PASS  check 8/8  test 9/9
TWO DEFECTS THE AUDIT'S VERIFIERS CONFIRMED

Both were found by the collaboration-and-canvas audit and both survived adversarial verification, which
matters here: of 122 findings only 49 reached a verifier before a session limit stopped it, and of those
31 survived and 14 were refuted outright. These two are from the surviving set, and each was confirmed
failing against the unfixed code before its test was kept.

1. A CLASS DROPPED ON A SCROLLED BOARD LANDED OFF-SCREEN

The same TransferHandler instance is installed on two components: on graphComponent, and again on
graphComponent.getGraphControl(). A drop point is relative to whichever one received it. The graph
control is the full-size canvas *inside* the viewport, so its coordinates already account for
scrolling - and the conversion added the viewport's scroll offset on top. On a board scrolled down 500
pixels, a class dropped in the middle of the visible area was recorded 500 units below it. Off-screen,
so the drop appeared to have done nothing at all.

The instructive part is where the right answer already was. Eight lines from the wrong conversion,
shareCursor says:

  // The event is on the graph control, which is the scrolled content, so only the zoom has
  // to be undone - the mirror of PeerCursorLayer, and of toGraphPoint minus its scroll term.

The correct arithmetic was written down, next to the incorrect one, in a comment that names the
difference and does not resolve it. Three gestures had three spellings of one calculation: the
double-click path called JGraphX's own converter and was right, cursor sharing divided by the zoom and
was right, the drop path added the scroll and was wrong.

There is now one function, graphPointFromControl, and all three go through it. Four tests, one of
which asserts the *absence* of a scroll term - that is the thing that came back, so that is the thing
worth pinning. Cursor sharing also picks up the view-translate term it had been omitting: zero on a
default view, not in general.

toGraphPoint is gone rather than left behind. It had exactly one caller.

2. OBSOLETION DID NOT SURVIVE THE WIRE

odk/Obsoletion writes owl:deprecated "true"^^xsd:boolean. Every non-label annotation travelled as its
lexical form alone and was rebuilt with factory.getOWLLiteral(value) - xsd:string. So a peer received

  owl:deprecated "true"^^xsd:string

and OWL API's isDeprecatedIRIAssertion is FALSE for that. A term retired on one machine stayed live on
the other, both files claimed to say the same thing, and nothing reported the difference.

Nothing could report it, which is why it lasted. No reasoner interprets an annotation - the codebase
says so itself in Provenance's javadoc - and the lexical form matched, so a textual diff of the values
agreed too. The divergence is visible only by asking OWL API what the axiom means, which is what the
new test does: it asserts isDeprecatedIRIAssertion at the receiving end rather than comparing strings.
Against the unfixed code the literal arrives as OWLLiteralImplString and the assertion fails.

The same loss hit every typed or tagged non-label annotation - skos:prefLabel "Pizza"@de arriving
untagged, a numeric annotation arriving as text - each of which shows up in the next release diff
between two editors who believe they are in sync.

The operation now carries `datatype` and `lang`, and only when they are not the default: xsd:string is
omitted because that is what a plain literal reports and what the receiver builds anyway, so an
operation an older plugin or the web client already understands goes out byte-identical. Removal
matching was tightened at the same time - without that, a removal of "true"^^xsd:boolean matches an
xsd:string "true" on the far side and retracts the wrong axiom, which is the same confusion arriving
from the other direction.

3. DELETE SAID NOTHING, THREE WAYS

removeSelectionFromCanvas returned a count and the Delete action discarded it. Three silences followed
from that one line:

  - Delete on a term removed it and said nothing.
  - Delete on a sticky note or a frame did nothing at all and said nothing either, because
    membership.remove returns false for an id that is not a term. Indistinguishable from a broken
    shortcut.
  - Delete with nothing selected also did nothing silently, which is the same shrug again.

And the Escape binding the testing guide documents did not exist, so the only way out of a rubber-band
selection was to click empty canvas and hope to miss a node - with Delete one keystroke away from
removing whatever was still caught in it.

Delete now counts three outcomes and says which happened, because they mean genuinely different things:
a term comes off the board and stays in the ontology; a note or frame is deleted outright, since it
exists nowhere else; an edge is left alone with a reason, because an edge is an axiom and removing one
belongs behind the confirmation the context menu already has.

The clause that matters most is the one about the ontology. "Removed from the board" and "deleted from
the ontology" look identical on a canvas - the node disappears either way - and nothing in this
interface told them apart. A curator who believes they have retired a term and has only hidden it finds
out at the next release. One who believes the reverse spends an afternoon hunting a class that never
left.

A NOTE ON HOW THIS RELEASE WAS ASSEMBLED

1.54.0 was built and smoked on both hosts, and then a third fix was written on top of it. That made the
receipt describe a jar that would not ship, so it was rebuilt and re-smoked with all three in. The same
thing happened at 1.52.0. The rule this settles on: no source edits between a build and its commit -
because a receipt naming a build nobody will run is worse than no receipt, and Felix keys its bundle
cache on symbolic name and version, so two jars under one number is how somebody ends up running the
one they did not test.

WHAT THE VERIFIERS CHANGED ABOUT MY OWN ACCOUNT

Worth recording, because it cuts both ways. The verifiers corrected several findings' line numbers and
narrowed two scenarios - and on the ontology-binding defect fixed in 1.51.0, all three independently
noted the outbound half was broader than an ontology switch: the change listener is model-manager-level,
so edits to *any* loaded ontology were published. That is what was fixed, so the correction confirms
the shape of the fix rather than extending it. On the multilingual label defect, a verifier pointed out
it needs no second language at all: a single "X"@en arrives untagged, which is already axiom-level
divergence.

NUMBERS

1199 tests, 0 failures, 0 skipped - a fully unskipped run. 8 new: four for the coordinate conversion,
two live ones over a real socket for the datatype and the language tag, two for what Delete reports. 45 JavaScript tests pass.
