OntoBoard 1.63.0 - host smoke receipt

Produced by tools/smoke.ps1 -SelfTest.

  2026-09-26  Protege 5.6.9  OWL API 4.5.29  JRE Temurin 11.0.25  -Xmx500M  PASS  check 8/8  test 10/10
  2026-09-26  Protege 5.5.0  OWL API 4.5.9   JRE 1.8.0_121        -Xmx500M  PASS  check 8/8  test 10/10


PRESENCE THAT DOES NOT MISLEAD

Section 5 of docs/superpowers/specs/2026-09-25-canvas-interface-plan.md - D1 to D4 - which completes that
plan. Four things in the "it works, but" category: nothing threw, nothing was logged, and no test could
have reported any of them.

1. PRESENCE CAME ONLY FROM THE MOUSE

shareCursor was wired to mouseMoved and mouseDragged and to nothing else. Two consequences:

  - Selecting a term told nobody until the mouse happened to move afterwards. Clicking a node and reading
    it, or finding it with Ctrl+F and reading it, published nothing - so the single most useful thing
    presence can carry, "she is looking at Margherita", was carried only by accident.
  - Somebody who joined a board and read the diagram without moving the mouse never appeared at all. To
    everybody else that is indistinguishable from nobody having joined, which is the worst possible
    answer in a tool whose whole claim is that you can see your colleagues.

Selection changes and joining both announce now. The position is the selected node's centre, else the
last cursor position, else the middle of the visible canvas - in that order, and never the origin, which
for anybody who has scrolled is somewhere the canvas is not. The selected node's centre beats a stale
cursor deliberately: it is what the user is actually looking at, and where a colleague following them
wants to be taken.

2. GEOMETRY WAS PUBLISHED AND THEN DISCARDED

Every operation carries the node's geometry. canvasHints in the view exists for no other purpose, and its
comment says so: "so a peer draws a new node where it actually is rather than at the origin". The
receiving side never read it - onOperation mapped the operation to axioms, applied them, and dropped the
rest. So the sending side did the work and the receiving side threw it away, and a class created by a
colleague landed wherever an unpositioned node goes.

Adopted now, under two rules that are both about not fighting the local user:

  - A position this board already has is never replaced. The wire has no "moved" operation, so an inbound
    position is not news about a move - it is the sender's geometry at the moment they made some edit.
    Adopting it over a local one would drag somebody's node across their own board because a colleague
    added a label to it.
  - The origin is read as "no hint", not as a coordinate. OperationMapper.putGeometry writes 0.0 when the
    sender had no geometry for a term, which is every change made from Protege's own tabs rather than the
    canvas - most of them. Taking that literally would stack every such arrival at (0,0), which is worse
    than the row it replaced and is the same mistake the expansion code made before 1.59.0.

The geometry hand-off happens before the "nothing to apply" early return, because a peer re-asserting a
declaration produces no change while this board can still have the term and nowhere to draw it - which is
the common case when two people put the same class on their boards independently.

3. A REFUSED SESSION WAS STILL HELD

A refusal and a dropped connection were both reported as onStatus(reason, false), and the toolbar took
its button label from that flag:

    collaborateButton.setText(connected ? "Disconnect" : "Collaborate...");

So after a refusal the button read "Collaborate..." while a live session object was still held - clicking
it disconnected rather than opening the dialog, and the only way to discover that was to try. During an
ordinary reconnect it said the same thing while the session was perfectly alive, which is the same lie
in the other direction.

The label now follows whether a session exists, which is what the button will *do*; the status line
carries the socket's state, which is what it is for. And a refusal is reported separately from a
disconnect - onSessionEnded - because the two mean different things: one is final, the other is a session
that still exists and is retrying. The view drops the session on a refusal, so the label and the state
cannot disagree.

TWO OF THE FOUR ARE VERIFIED OVER A REAL SOCKET

CollabLiveTest spawns the real node server and runs two real peers, and two new tests there matter more
than their unit equivalents:

  - joining a board announces itself. The callback is invoked by the client's own connected path, so a
    unit test that calls onConnected by hand proves the plumbing after the point in question.
  - a geometry value published by one peer arrives at the other's host. A unit test shows the callback is
    called; only the wire shows the number survives being serialised to JSON, gated by the bridge's type
    check, and read back as 420.0.

WHAT THIS DOES NOT COVER

Stated plainly: the four tests added here are specifications for new behaviour, not regression pins.
Three of the four could not fail against the old code because the callbacks they assert on did not exist,
so "confirmed failing first" does not apply in the way it did for the defects earlier in this series. The
live pair is the strongest evidence available: it fails if the announcement or the geometry does not reach
a real peer.

Not done either: nothing here gives a peer joining an existing board a catch-up of what is already there,
and a disconnect during a slow connect can still leave a session the user cannot see. Both are on the
audit's list and neither is in this plan's section 5.

The canvas plan is now complete - sections 2, 3, 4 and 5.

A TOOLING ODDITY, RECORDED BECAUSE IT LOOKS LIKE A HANG

The 5.5.0 smoke took about thirteen minutes to produce its verdict, twice in a row (1.62.0 and 1.63.0),
having taken one or two minutes for every release before them. The Protege run itself was not slow: the
log shows the JVM starting at 16:18:24 and the self-test verdict at 16:18:35, eleven seconds later. The
time went somewhere before Start-Process, and nothing in smoke.ps1 between its arguments and its launch
is expensive - it reads run.bat, rewrites a heap flag, and takes the log's length.

The cause was not identified. It did not affect either verdict, and it is recorded here so that whoever
sees "waiting" for ten minutes next time knows it has happened before and resolved itself, rather than
killing the run and assuming the plugin hangs on Java 8.

NUMBERS

1312 tests, 1 skipped, 0 failures. 14 new: 8 in PeerGeometryTest, 4 in CollabSessionTest, 2 in
CollabLiveTest.

Counted three ways, agreeing: Maven's summary, the surefire reports, and an anchored ^\s*@Test\s*$ across
src/test/java; 92 report files for 92 test classes. The skip is BundleConfigurationTest's jar-dependent
case, which has nothing to inspect during the test phase because target/*.jar is emptied before each
build; the jar is built afterwards and is what both hosts loaded.
