OntoBoard 1.65.0 - host smoke receipt

Produced by tools/smoke.ps1 -SelfTest.

  2026-09-26  Protege 5.6.9  OWL API 4.5.29  JRE Temurin 11.0.25  -Xmx500M  PASS  check 8/8  test 10/10
  2026-09-26  Protege 5.5.0  OWL API 4.5.9   JRE 1.8.0_121        -Xmx500M  PASS  check 8/8  test 10/10


THE STYLESHEET NAMED A FONT IT NEVER USED, AND THE KEY DESCRIBED A BOARD NOBODY DREW

Release 2 of docs/superpowers/specs/2026-09-26-canvas-board-design.md. Four defects and a palette, all
of them invisible without rendering the board and opening the image.

1. A FONT THAT WAS NEVER ONCE USED

    private static final String FONT = "Segoe UI, Helvetica Neue, Arial, sans-serif";

That is a CSS fallback chain handed to java.awt.Font, which takes one family name:

    new Font("Segoe UI, Helvetica Neue, Arial, sans-serif", BOLD, 13).getFamily()  ->  "Dialog"
    new Font("Segoe UI", BOLD, 13).getFamily()                                     ->  "Segoe UI"

So no board, screenshot, paper figure or export has ever been drawn in the typeface this code names -
every one of them was the logical font Dialog. And because the SVG writer emits the family string
verbatim while the PNG goes through AWT, the SVG and the PNG of the same board were in different
typefaces. It resolves one installed family now, from a preference list, falling back to the logical
family that always exists. Probed headless: 223 families available, Segoe UI among them, so a CI render
resolves the same way a desktop does.

2. THE NAMESPACE COLOUR WAS PAINTED OVER EVERY KIND

styleFor appended ";strokeColor=" + colours.colourFor(iri) to every node, whatever it was - so the
kind's own stroke was overwritten. board.svg drew the individual Italy in the class blue where the
legend promises lilac, and both property hexagons in that same blue. The key was wrong for four of its
six node rows, and had been since namespace colouring was added.

Classes only now. That is the channel's point: classes are the bulk of a schema, and telling two
vocabularies apart matters most where there are most of them.

3. THE UNSATISFIABLE FILL WAS REGISTERED AND NEVER DRAWN

The UNSATISFIABLE style has carried a pink fill for the legend since the marker existed, and styleFor
only ever overrode the stroke. So the board showed a white card with a red outline while the key showed
a pink one. A red outline on its own is also exactly the channel a colour vision deficiency removes:
#C0392B simulates to #77771E under deuteranopia, which is deltaE 12.9 from a brown a namespace can be
assigned. The fill is drawn now.

4. AN IMPORTED TERM WAS A GREY SLAB WITH FULL-STRENGTH BLACK TEXT

Two causes, both in the render and neither in the code. opacity fades the SHAPE and not the label -
mxGraphics2DCanvas.drawLabel reads a different key - so a faded box carried bold black text as though
nothing had been faded. And JGraphX paints a drop shadow as a hard offset copy of the same path in one
flat colour, defaulting to opaque mid-grey: under a 55% white fill that composites to #DEDEDF, which is
why an imported term rendered as a slab.

The shadow is now translucent (alpha 0x26, offset 0,2) and the imported label has its own secondary ink
at 5.84:1 on the composited fill. textOpacity would have been the wrong fix - at 55% the ink composites
to #7D8083, 3.87:1, under the 4.5:1 floor for text.

AND THE THINGS THAT WERE TASTE RATHER THAN DEFECT

Is-a edges carry a hollow UML generalisation triangle and are solid. block + endFill=false is the only
route to a hollow triangle - 4.2.2 ships five arrowheads and none of them is one - and the marker still
returns its full length, so the connector stops at the triangle's base. Going solid frees the dash to
mean "the reasoner derived this": before, asserted and inferred differed only by dash length and one
step of grey, which is a legend lookup rather than a glance, on the one distinction this canvas must
never blur. Inferred edges also gained an open-circle tail, so the two are separated on two independent
channels - which matters because after deuteranopia the closest pair in the new edge set is 12.0 deltaE
apart, survivable only because the dash is redundant with the hue.

The palette was re-measured against the canvas and against each fill. Nothing is below 4.4:1 now. Three
strokes had been at 3.1, under WCAG 1.4.11's 3:1 floor once anti-aliasing is allowed for; the inferred
grey was 2.90:1; and the sticky note's outline was 1.69:1 - the lowest-contrast line on the board, on
the one object whose entire purpose is to be noticed. Datatype and data-property nodes had been exactly
the same fill AND the same stroke, so the key drew two rows with one swatch; the data property moves to
teal, and its edge moves with it, because the edge and the node for one OWL construct should be one
colour.

The individual stopped being a rhombus. A 160x60 rhombus offers about 77px of interior where a two-line
ontology label needs 128, and padding cannot rescue it: at the padding the geometry demands, "Cheesey
vegetable topping" wraps to three lines and a longer topping name to four, which is taller than the box.
It is a card with an underlined name - UML's instance-specification convention. Stated plainly: the
underline does not survive SVG export, the lilac fill does, and the class javadoc's claim that "shape
carries the entity kind" is amended rather than left standing.

Property hexagons gained 22px of padding each side. mxGraphView.getWordWrapWidth subtracts insets and
spacing from the cell's full width and knows nothing about the shape, so a hexagon whose corners sit at
a quarter and three quarters of its width offered 101px against a 127.8px wrap width - any two-line
label hung out of both slanted edges.

ONE THING THE SPEC DID NOT CATCH, FOUND THE SAME WAY

With the individual fixed, the rendered key still drew both property rows as plain rectangles while the
board draws hexagons - the same fault as the rhombus, in reverse. Found by looking at legend.png after
the change, and fixed in the same release. Every row of the key now draws the shape the canvas draws.

WHAT THIS DOES NOT COVER

CanvasLegendTest.legendColoursMatchTheStylesheet compares every row's fill, stroke, dash and opacity
against the live stylesheet, so the colours cannot drift from the board. Nothing compares the SHAPES the
key paints against the canvas - that is hand-written Swing on one side and a JGraphX style name on the
other - which is why both shape mismatches survived until somebody rendered the panel. A test for that
would have to rasterise both and compare, and is not written.

Also unmeasured here: how any of this looks on a 150% scaled display, or under Protege 5.6's dark look
and feel. The canvas background is a hardcoded light hex; the spec's R4.8 addresses that deliberately
rather than by accident.

NUMBERS

1324 tests, 1 skipped, 0 failures. No new tests: this release changes values that
CanvasLegendTest.legendColoursMatchTheStylesheet already guards.

That the guard has teeth was verified rather than assumed, because the whole edit was applied in one go
and so the test never failed on the way. Reverting one hex - the class stroke, back to the old #4A90D9 -
produces:

    stroke colour drifted for obClass ==> expected: <#2D6FBF> but was: <#4A90D9>

and the change was then put back.

Because that is a source edit after the build, and this project's rule is that there are none between a
build and its commit, the revert was proved rather than trusted: the jar was rebuilt from the reverted
source and every class under de/fizkarlsruhe/ compared against the jar the two hosts actually loaded.
All identical. (The jar files themselves hash differently - zip entry timestamps - which is why the
comparison is per class rather than per archive.)

Counted three ways, agreeing: Maven's summary, the surefire reports, and an anchored ^\s*@Test\s*$ across
src/test/java; 93 report files for 93 test classes.
