OntoBoard 1.72.0 - host smoke receipt

Produced by tools/smoke.ps1 -SelfTest.

  2026-10-01  Protege 5.6.9  OWL API 4.5.29  JRE Temurin 11.0.25  -Xmx500M  PASS  check 8/8  test 10/10
  2026-10-01  Protege 5.5.0  OWL API 4.5.9   JRE 1.8.0_121        -Xmx500M  PASS  check 8/8  test 10/10


A BLOCKER ON A REAL PROJECT, THE DESTRUCTION IT WAS HIDING, AND IDENTIFIERS ON THE BOARD

1. "UPDATE PROJECT FILES" COULD NOT READ AN ODK EDIT FILE

Reported from the field: "mwo-edit.owl records no xml:base and no owl:Ontology rdf:about, so the
project's base IRI cannot be recovered."

It records neither because it is not RDF/XML. It is OWL Functional Syntax, opening with Prefix(...)
declarations and then

    Ontology(<http://purls.helmholtz-metadaten.de/mwo/mwo.owl>

with the IRI in plain view on line 11. OdkProjectSettings.baseIriIn knew two spellings, xml:base and
owl:Ontology rdf:about, and both are RDF/XML. ODK's own release recipe ends in `convert -f ofn`, and
Protege writes the same when asked for functional syntax, so this is the normal shape of an ODK edit
file rather than an unusual one - which means the reader failed on essentially every real ODK project
and succeeded only on the ones this plugin had scaffolded itself.

A third pattern is recognised now. Verified against both: MWO yields
http://purls.helmholtz-metadaten.de/mwo/mwo.owl, and an RDF/XML scaffold still yields its xml:base,
which still wins where both could match because it is the authored value. An anonymous Ontology() is
still refused, and the message now says to give the ontology an IRI.

2. FIXING THAT UNCOVERED SOMETHING MUCH WORSE

With the read working, Update project files on MWO no longer fails. It plans - and the plan was to
rewrite six files, including src/ontology/Makefile.

MWO's Makefile is ODK's own: 767 lines carrying every import rule, every release artefact and every
quality target the project has. OntoBoard's generated Makefile is eight targets. Replacing one with the
other is not an update, it is deletion, and it would have taken qc.yml, README.md and .gitignore with
it.

Until this release that could not happen, because baseIriIn failed first. The user was protected by a
bug. Removing the bug removed the protection, so the protection is now deliberate: OdkRegenerator
refuses any project it did not scaffold, before reading anything.

Two signals, either conclusive, both checked against real repositories rather than reasoned about:
src/ontology/run.sh, which only ODK puts there; and ODK_VERSION_MAKEFILE in the Makefile, which MWO's
carries fifteen markers' worth of and a scaffolded one carries none of. The refusal names the command
that does work - `sh run.sh update_repo` - because ODK regenerates these files itself, which is exactly
what the ODK walkthrough slides say.

Verified end to end: MWO is refused with that message; a scaffolded project plans with 0 changes.

This is the second time in three releases that making something work has exposed a destructive path
that was unreachable only by accident. It is worth saying plainly: a feature that fails early is not
the same as a feature that is safe, and the difference is invisible until the failure is fixed.

3. A NODE SHOWS ITS IDENTIFIER AS WELL AS ITS LABEL

Asked for as "obo:BFO_0000023 (role)". A label alone is the one thing an editor cannot cite - labels get
edited, identifiers do not, and a reviewer asking which term a box is wants the identifier. Protege's
own entity list shows both.

Prefixes come from the ontology itself first, over a short built-in table for the handful every OBO
project uses and some serialisations omit. Read from MWO: 19 prefixes, giving obo:BFO_0000001 entity,
obo:BFO_0000002 continuant, obo:BFO_0000023 role.

Three decisions worth recording. The longest matching namespace wins, because an ontology declaring
both obo: and a narrower bfo: would otherwise name the same term two ways in one diagram depending on
hash order. A match whose remainder contains / or # is rejected, because
obo:uberon/releases/2024-01-01/uberon.owl is not a CURIE anybody wants to read. And the identifier is a
field of its own rather than folded into the label, because Find matches and ranks on the label - an
exact name beating a longer one containing it - and prefixing every label with an identifier would
break that ranking for every term.

Two lines rather than the one line the request showed. A node box is about 160px and
"obo:BFO_0000023 (role)" is not: on one line every identified term would either widen the diagram or
elide down to the part that is identical across all of them. The identifier goes first because it is
the fixed-width part, so a column of nodes lines up. One line only, when the label would repeat the
identifier's local name - which is what an ontology with no rdfs:label produces.

4. THE NATIVE ODK ROUTE IS NO LONGER UNVERIFIED

1.71.0 shipped it untested, because ODK does not support native environments on Windows. It has now
been exercised in WSL Ubuntu 22.04, and it works:

  pip install --user odk-core          odk and odk-helper
  odk install ~/odkenv                 21s, no Docker
  OntoBoard-scaffolded project         make test -> exit 0, all four checks
  real `odk seed` repository           make all_assets -> exit 0, produced nto.owl, .obo, -base, -full
  occurrences of "docker" in the log   zero

Three things that are not in ODK's documentation and cost an hour between them. `lightrdf` is missing
from odk-core's dependencies, so odk-helper dies with ModuleNotFoundError. `odk install` skips tools
already present - hence --force - so it installed no ROBOT here and supplied only the ROBOT plugins.
And the activation script does not add pip's bin directory, so odk-helper is not found: a real ODK
Makefile calls it for every release artefact, and the build dies at the first one.

That last one was a defect in Toolchain.nativeCommand, which sourced the activation script and nothing
else. It prepends $HOME/.local/bin now, with the reproduction recorded in the comment and a test.

NUMBERS

1389 tests, 0 failures, 1 skipped. 14 new: six for the identifier, six for the regeneration guard and
the functional-syntax header, one for the native PATH, one for the longest-prefix rule.

The skip is BundleConfigurationTest's manifest test, which assumes a jar in target/ and skips in the
run that produces one. The `mvn -o test` run before the version bump reported 0 skipped.

Counted three ways, agreeing: Maven's summary, the 97 surefire reports for 97 test classes, and an
anchored ^\s*@Test\s*$ across src/test/java.

STILL OPEN FROM THE SAME REQUEST

Four canvas items remain and are the next release: drag-to-pan (which reverses 1.68.0 and needs
marquee selection given a home), alignment guides while dragging, properties drawn as edges from the
axioms rather than as standalone nodes, and saying which axiom an inferred edge came from. After those:
the imports terms editor, and the choice between date-based and semantic-version releases - MWO's
scheme reads VERSION and PRIOR_VERSION from the command line and uses .../mwo/3.0.2 with no /releases/
segment, so the choice changes the IRI's shape and not only its text.
