OntoBoard 1.73.0 - host smoke receipt

Produced by tools/smoke.ps1 -SelfTest.

  2026-10-01  Protege 5.6.9  OWL API 4.5.29  JRE Temurin 11.0.25  -Xmx500M  PASS  check 8/8  test 10/10
  2026-10-01  Protege 5.5.0  OWL API 4.5.9   JRE 1.8.0_121        -Xmx500M  PASS  check 8/8  test 10/10


THE CANVAS RELEASE: WHY AN INFERENCE IS THERE, WHAT A NODE LINES UP WITH, AND A DRAG THAT
MOVES THE BOARD AGAIN

Three of the eight items from the same request. The fourth canvas item - properties drawn as
edges from the axioms rather than as standalone nodes - is a projection change and is next.

1. "WHY IS THIS INFERRED?"

The canvas has drawn the reasoner's conclusions since 1.20.0 and could never say where one came
from. A conclusion you cannot trace is one you have to take on faith, which is the wrong
relationship to have with a reasoner. The useful question about an unexpected inference is almost
never "is the reasoner right" - it is "which of my axioms did I not mean", and only a
justification answers that.

Right-click a dotted edge. It runs off the event thread behind an abandonable dialog and reports
through the same result dialog every other operation uses, so it can be saved.

It is a justification and not a walk up the hierarchy, and the difference is not academic.
InferredEdges draws to the nearest ancestor ON THE BOARD, so "Dog is a kind of Animal" can be true
with no axiom mentioning both. Run against a worked example:

    ASKED:   Dog SubClassOf Animal
    SUMMARY: 2 independent justifications. The inference survives until every one of them is
             broken, so removing a single axiom will not remove the edge.
      justification 1:
          Dog SubClassOf owns some Thing
          owns Domain Animal
      justification 2:
          Dog SubClassOf mammal
          mammal SubClassOf Animal

Justification 1 is a property domain. No hierarchy walk would ever have found it, and it is
exactly the shape of the real case - an inferred parent nobody wanted, resting on a domain axiom
written years earlier for a different purpose.

Three decisions worth recording.

It explains with the reasoner PROTEGE IS RUNNING, taken from OWLReasonerManager rather than picked
by the plugin. ELK cannot see an entailment that follows from a cardinality restriction, so
explaining HermiT's conclusion with ELK comes back empty - and empty reads as "there is no reason"
rather than "you asked the wrong reasoner".

Two independent justifications are reported as two, with a sentence saying what that means. The
alternative is a user deleting the one axiom they were shown and watching the edge stay.

An empty result is reported as a gap in the explanation, not as an absence of reason. The edge is
on the board because a reasoner concluded it, so a justification exists; coming back empty says
the generator did not find one, and the two causes a user can act on are named.

Both preconditions are checked before the dialog appears - inferences stay on the board once
drawn, so somebody can switch the reasoner off in Protege and still be looking at dotted edges,
and a minute spent reaching an empty table is worse than an immediate refusal that says what to
do.

ExplainOperation.explain is safe to call from inside this bundle, checked with javap rather than
assumed: of the methods on that class only renderExplanationAsMarkdown constructs
uk.ac.manchester.cs.owl.explanation.ProtegeExplanationOrderer, which is the one Explanations has
always avoided and says why. owlexplanation 2.0.0 was already embedded, transitively through
protege-editor-owl, so this added no dependency.

There is a test that the open ontology holds exactly the axioms it started with. The technique is
subtractive - axioms are taken away and the reasoner asked whether the conclusion survives - and
the obvious implementation of it would mutate the ontology it was handed, which here is the one
open in Protege.

2. A DRAG MOVES THE BOARD AGAIN

Reported as "click-drag should move the canvas". That reverses 1.68.0, so it is worth writing the
whole story down rather than inverting a third time.

Until 1.68.0 a plain drag panned and a marquee needed Ctrl or Shift, documented in a doc comment
and nowhere a user would look. 1.68.0 inverted it, on the reasoning that selecting several terms
at once is the thing a person does most on a board. In use it is not: a board is bigger than the
window far more often than a selection spans several terms, so the gesture people reached for
first was the one that had just been taken away.

So neither is behind a doc comment now. It is a mode: two buttons on the toolbar, H and V, the
choice remembered per user in Preferences, panning the default. Whichever mode you are in the
other gesture is on Shift or Ctrl, and space pans in both - that mirror is the only arrangement
that does not have to be memorised.

The decision is nine lines in CanvasGesture, shared by the two call sites that need it: the
component's isPanningEvent and the view's rubberband. They must be exact complements and the
failure is silent either way - if both claim a drag the board pans while a selection rectangle is
drawn across it, and if neither does the canvas reads as frozen. A test walks all sixteen
combinations of mode, space, modifier and cell and asserts that exactly one claims each. Neither
call site is testable; the function between them is.

The rubberband also gained an explicit left-button test. mxRubberband.mousePressed in 4.2.2 never
asks which button was pressed - isRubberbandTrigger is literally "return true" - so a right-drag
reached it too, and only failed to draw a marquee because the panning handler had consumed the
event first. That is registration order again, and it is a thing to depend on deliberately or not
at all.

One cost, recorded because it is not free. The cursor says which mode the board is in, and
mxGraphHandler.mouseMoved consumes the mouse-moved event whenever a handler supplies a cursor, so
empty board now consumes where it did not. That already happens over every node, which is where
anything downstream would care, so the change lands on the part of the canvas where nothing is
listening. Checked: the cursor-sharing listener that publishes the pointer to peers does not test
isConsumed.

3. ALIGNMENT GUIDES

A grid is a texture, and the question it does not answer is the one that matters: not "is this on
a grid point" but "is this edge the same as that edge". Without an answer the only way to align
two terms is to compare by eye, so diagrams drift by a few pixels everywhere.

Up to two lines - the nearest vertical and the nearest horizontal - drawn through the stationary
node's edge and extended past both ends. Not more: a dense board matches a dozen edges at once and
drawing them all turns the diagram into a cage. Left, centre and right on one axis, top, middle
and bottom on the other, plus edge-to-edge touching. Centres are tried first, so a tie does not
depend on the order the board happened to be iterated in - and nearest still wins outright, or a
centre three pixels off would beat a left edge exactly on.

With the grid on, a guide means exact. The step is 20 and the tolerance is 4, so two snapped nodes
are either on the same line or at least 20 apart, and inside the tolerance can only mean zero. The
tolerance earns its keep under Alt-drag, this canvas's "ignore the grid this once", where it reads
as "you are nearly there".

Two deliberate omissions. It does not snap - the grid already does, and a second magnet pulling
against the first is how a node lands where neither wanted it. And it draws nothing into an
exported PNG or SVG, because CanvasExport renders from the graph model and never calls the
component's paint; for a mark that exists only during a drag that is correct rather than a
trade-off.

The arithmetic is worth recording because getting it wrong would be invisible. previewBounds is
positioned from bbox - the bounding box INCLUDING label overhang and stroke width - while the
rectangles it is compared against are cell states. The two differ by a pixel or two, which is most
of a four-pixel tolerance. getPreviewLocation builds its result as the snapped cell bounds plus
(bbox - cellBounds), read out of the bytecode, so subtracting that offset back off recovers the
cell rectangle exactly.

Repainting is two thin strips rather than the control. A guide spans the nodes it joins, which on
a tall board is most of the viewport, and this runs on every mouse event of a drag.

Only visible nodes are candidates. That bounds the cost on a board of several hundred terms, and
it stops a guide whose other end is off screen - a line that says "aligned with something" and
leaves the user scrolling about to find what.

NUMBERS

1423 tests, 0 failures, 1 skipped. 34 new: eleven for the explanation, fifteen for the guide
geometry, eight for the gesture decision.

The skip is BundleConfigurationTest's manifest test, which assumes a jar in target/ and skips in
the run that produces one. The `mvn -o test` run before the version bump reported 0 skipped.

Counted three ways, agreeing: Maven's summary, the sum over 100 surefire reports for 100 test
classes, and an anchored ^\s*@Test\s*$ across src/test/java.

A test was changed rather than added, and it is worth naming: ShortcutsPanelTest asserted that the
Drag row contains the word "select". That encoded 1.68.0's behaviour, which this release reverses,
so it now asserts that both halves of the mode are listed and ties itself to CanvasGesture.DEFAULT
rather than to the word "pan" - flipping the default without rewriting the row fails there instead
of in the field.

WHAT THIS DOES NOT PROVE

The smoke run starts the plugin, opens the tab and constructs its views on both hosts. Nothing in
it looks at a pixel, so "the guides are drawn where the geometry says" rests on the geometry having
fifteen tests and on the line being anchored to a real node's edge rather than to the preview.

STILL OPEN FROM THE SAME REQUEST

Properties drawn as edges from the axioms rather than as standalone nodes. Then the imports terms
editor, and the choice between date-based and semantic-version releases - MWO's scheme reads
VERSION and PRIOR_VERSION from the command line and uses .../mwo/3.0.2 with no /releases/ segment,
so the choice changes the IRI's shape and not only its text.
