OntoBoard 1.77.0 - host smoke receipt

Produced by tools/smoke.ps1 -SelfTest.

  2026-10-05  Protege 5.6.9  OWL API 4.5.29  JRE Temurin 11.0.25  -Xmx500M  PASS  check 8/8  test 10/10
  2026-10-05  Protege 5.5.0  OWL API 4.5.9   JRE 1.8.0_121        -Xmx500M  PASS  check 8/8  test 10/10


THE TWO DEFECTS THE ODK AUDIT FOUND, FIXED

Both were found by auditing the plugin against a real ODK repository in order to write
docs/odk-workflow.md, both were verified on that repository before being written down, and both
were shipped as documented gaps in 1.76.0 because the documentation was the deliverable. This
release closes them.

1. A TERM LIST WITH COMMENTS WAS UNREADABLE, WHICH MEANT ALL OF THEM

ODK and ROBOT write import term lists with the label beside each IRI, because a bare column of
IAO_0000109 is unreviewable in a pull request:

    http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/IAO_0000109 # measurement datum

OntoBoard rejected every line of that shape. The test for "is this an IRI" included "contains no
space" and was applied to the whole line.

Measured on the project it was found on, before and after:

                            before   after
    foaf_terms.txt             0        0     (genuinely empty)
    iao_terms.txt              0       13
    nfdicore_terms.txt         0        0     (genuinely empty)
    obi_terms.txt              0        8
    pmdco_terms.txt            0       28
    TOTAL READABLE             0       49     malformed: 0

Zero. Every term in the project was invisible to Refresh imports, and the Imports table went on
reporting all five lists as present - so refusing to rebuild a module looked like nothing
happening rather than like a refusal. ROBOT's own --term-file accepts these lines, which is the
whole point: the file is written for ROBOT and was being read by something stricter than ROBOT.

The IRI is now the first whitespace-delimited token. That is not a shortcut around the comment
character and the distinction matters: an IRI may legitimately contain # as a fragment separator,
so splitting on the first # would silently turn http://example.org/o#Thing into
http://example.org/o - a different term, extracted without complaint. Whitespace cannot appear in
an IRI, so splitting on it cannot truncate one.

malformedIn still reports a line that is genuinely not a term, which is the half that had to not
regress: loosening a reader is only safe while it can still say "this line is wrong".

2. ALLOCATING AN ID RANGE DELETED A LINE FROM THE FILE

toManchester is a canonical renderer - it emits a fixed template - so anything the template has
no field for disappears the moment a range is allocated. Round-tripping a real project's ranges
file through parse and render, and diffing:

    original lines: 61
    rendered lines: 54
    lines present in the original and absent from the render:
        Datatype: rdf:PlainLiteral

One line, declared after the template's closing Datatype: xsd:integer, dropped silently - three
lines below a javadoc promising that adding an editor "produces a one-range diff rather than
reformatting the whole file". Nobody reads a ranges file after allocating a block, so the loss
would have been found by a failing build weeks later, if at all.

Two defences, because the second is the one that covers what was not measured:

  - parse now keeps top-level declarations the template cannot express, withRangeFor carries them
    through, and toManchester emits them after its own closing datatype. The measured case
    round-trips losslessly.

  - IdRanges.whatWouldBeLost compares the original against the replacement line by line, ignoring
    indentation, and IdRangesAction refuses to write when anything would go - naming the lines
    and leaving the file alone. A ranges file is hand-editable and there is no list of everything
    somebody might reasonably put in one, so the guard is not "the case we found" but "anything
    we did not".

Indentation is excluded from the comparison deliberately. The renderer's layout differs from
ODK's by a few spaces inside the annotation blocks, and reporting that as data loss would make
the check noise - and a noisy safety check is one somebody turns off.

The javadoc that was not true has been rewritten to say what the method does: close to a
one-range diff, normalising indentation, with the declarations carried and a backstop behind
them.

NUMBERS

1482 tests, 0 failures, 1 skipped. 15 new: seven for the term list format, eight for the ranges
preservation and its guard.

The skip is BundleConfigurationTest's manifest test, which is guarded by assumeTrue(jar != null)
and so skips after a clean when target/ holds no jar - the direction two earlier receipts stated
backwards and 1.74.0 corrected.

Counted three ways, agreeing: Maven's summary, the sum over the surefire reports, and an anchored
^\s*@Test\s*$ across src/test/java.

DOCUMENTATION UPDATED IN THE SAME CHANGE

docs/odk-workflow.md described both defects as current. Both sections now describe the behaviour
this release has, and the import step moves from "cannot rebuild" to "rebuilds from term lists".
A documentation page that keeps a fixed defect is the same kind of lie as one that hides a real
one.

STILL OPEN

The yaml editor, which is the hinge the rest of the ODK gaps turn on: <ontology>-odk.yaml is
written once by the wizard and afterwards only five scalars are ever read, one of them on a real
ODK repository.

Three canvas requests arrived while this was being built and are next: labels shown on hover and
inside the node the way OntoGraph does it, including for properties; clicking a property putting
it in Protege's entity panel as clicking a class does; and exported images carrying the legend
and the prefix key, which today they do not - CanvasExport renders from the graph model and never
sees either.
