OntoBoard 1.78.0 - host smoke receipt

Produced by tools/smoke.ps1 -SelfTest.

  2026-10-05  Protege 5.6.9  OWL API 4.5.29  JRE Temurin 11.0.25  -Xmx500M  PASS  check 8/8  test 10/10
  2026-10-05  Protege 5.5.0  OWL API 4.5.9   JRE 1.8.0_121        -Xmx500M  PASS  check 8/8  test 10/10


THE BOARD WAS SHOWING IDENTIFIERS AND CALLING THEM LABELS

Three requests, one of which turned out to be a defect rather than a feature.

1. LABELS: FIVE OUT OF SIX WERE MISSING

Asked for as "i want that labels to be shown in the canvas". They were supposed to be already.

DisplayLabels asked EntitySearcher for annotations in ONE ontology. An imported term's rdfs:label
is not in that ontology - it is in the import. So on exactly the projects this plugin is built
for, where most of what a curator puts on a board comes from BFO, IAO, RO or OBI, the canvas drew
opaque identifiers.

Measured on a real ODK project with its catalog wired and its five-ontology closure loaded:

                                                   before   after
    entities carrying an rdfs:label somewhere        656      656
      drawn with their label                         113      656
      drawn as a bare identifier                     543        0

BFO_0000004 was on the board, and its label is "independent continuant".

The class comment had said all along that "an IRI fragment is a poor label: real ontologies use
opaque identifiers such as MWO_0000042, which tells a reader nothing" - and then showed exactly
that to five readers out of six. A comment describing the intention is not evidence about the
behaviour.

The edit file still wins over its imports: an ontology that re-labels an imported term has done
so deliberately, and showing the upstream wording instead would overrule the author in their own
file. That is what Protege's own rendering does.

Arrows gained the same thing for free, because they already called DisplayLabels. The same board:

    adapting process --RO_0000057--> BFO_0000004
    adapting process --has participant--> independent continuant

Cost: 22 ms per full refresh of a 172-term board over a 4,989-axiom closure, measured. OWL API
indexes annotation lookups by subject, so this scales with annotations-per-entity rather than
with the size of the ontology.

2. CLICKING A PROPERTY NOW FILLS PROTEGE'S ENTITY PANELS

Two faults, both of which looked like nothing happening - which is why neither reads as a bug
until somebody says "classes work and properties do not".

getEntitiesInSignature(IRI) searches one ontology, so clicking any imported term selected
nothing. The tab has had Object properties, Data properties, Individuals and the rest in it all
along, showing whatever had been selected before.

And an arrow is a property. Since 1.75.0 that is how a property is usually drawn - it was the
point of the change - so the commonest appearance of a property on the board answered no
question at all when clicked. PropertyEdgeId.propertyIn reads the property out of an edge id, in
every shape the canvas has ever written: pe|, rest|, data|, dr| and subprop|. A hierarchy edge
answers null, because it is not about a property.

Punning resolves deterministically now - class, then object property, then data property, then
individual - rather than by whichever the hash yielded, so the same click always opens the same
thing.

3. AN EXPORTED IMAGE CARRIES ITS KEY

The legend and the namespace colours stayed inside Protege with the person who made the picture.
mxCellRenderer renders the graph model, and neither is in the graph model - the same reason note
badges and alignment guides do not export, which for those is correct because they are transient.
A key is not transient. It is the part that makes the rest mean something.

LegendLayout computes the key as geometry; LegendRender draws that geometry into a raster for PNG
and as elements for SVG. Two renderers, one layout - laying it out twice is how a PNG and an SVG
of the same board come to disagree, and the disagreement is invisible until they are side by side
in a paper. SVG gets elements rather than an embedded bitmap, because half the reason to pick SVG
is that it does not blur when enlarged.

Looked at, not only asserted. The first render of the real board showed two things no test had
asked about: the explanations ran off the side of the panel, and the namespace rows read
"http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/" five times - accurate, and three times the width of the thing
being labelled. Both fixed: text is cut to fit with an ellipsis, and a namespace is named by the
prefix where the ontology declares that exact one. On the real board that gives "obo:" and "owl:"
as prefixes, with three namespaces the file does not declare a prefix for still shown as IRIs -
which is the honest answer rather than a guess.

Section headings are emitted by grouping on form rather than by watching for the form to change
while walking the list. The on-screen legend did the latter and printed "Relationships" twice,
because the two inferred rows sit after the modifier rows.

NUMBERS

1508 tests, 0 failures, 1 skipped. 26 new: seven for imported labels, ten for what a click
selects, nine for the exported key.

The skip is BundleConfigurationTest's manifest test, which skips after a clean when target/ holds
no jar.

Counted three ways, agreeing: Maven's summary, the sum over the surefire reports, and an anchored
^\s*@Test\s*$ across src/test/java.

WHAT WAS LOOKED AT RATHER THAN ASSERTED

The exported key was rendered from the real board and inspected as an image, twice - once to find
the overflow and the IRI rows, once to confirm they were fixed. No test can tell you that a key
looks like a key.

STILL OPEN FROM THE SAME REQUEST

"See what else from OntoGraph can be implemented here" - a survey, not yet done.

And from before: the <ontology>-odk.yaml editor, running project scripts from inside Protege, and
exposing the 123 bundled design patterns.
