OntoBoard 1.80.0 - host smoke receipt

Produced by tools/smoke.ps1 -SelfTest.

  2026-10-05  Protege 5.6.9  OWL API 4.5.29  JRE Temurin 11.0.25  -Xmx500M  PASS  check 8/8  test 10/10
  2026-10-05  Protege 5.5.0  OWL API 4.5.9   JRE 1.8.0_121        -Xmx500M  PASS  check 8/8  test 10/10


THE PROJECT CONFIGURATION IS VISIBLE AND EDITABLE

The largest gap in OntoBoard's ODK support, and the hinge the rest turn on. <id>-odk.yaml was
written once by the wizard and never shown again; five scalars were read by a regex, and on a
real ODK repository even those were unreachable because the regenerator refuses such a project
before reading anything. Of the thirteen keys a real project declares, exactly one - title - was
ever read, and the documentation had to tell people to leave Protege and open a text editor.

OntoBoard > Project > Project configuration... now lists every top-level key with its value and
its line, and lets scalars be edited.

SPLICED, NOT RE-SERIALISED

The design was chosen by measurement, not taste. Loading the real mwo-odk.yaml and dumping it
back rewrites 28 of its 41 lines - 13 even with the indentation options tuned - normalising a
flow sequence, a three-space nested indent, CRLF to LF, and the final newline the file does not
have. A one-word change would arrive in a pull request as a whole-file diff: the quiet
subtraction this project has now fixed three times.

So the parser is used only to locate a value, and those characters are replaced in the original
text. Measured on that file:

    13 top-level keys read, 9 editable, 4 structures shown read-only
    editing "title":  CRLF preserved, absent final newline preserved,
                      all comments preserved, LINES CHANGED: 1

WHAT IT REFUSES, AND WHY THAT IS THE FEATURE

A list, a nested block and a | or > block of text are shown but not editable. A structure's span
covers everything inside it, so replacing it in place would delete the contents - release
artefacts, the whole import_group, the robot_report settings. A file with a duplicate top-level
key is refused outright: YAML accepts one silently and keeps both, so an edit would patch
whichever copy the walk reached while ODK reads the other.

A value is quoted when writing it bare would change what it means - true, no, null, ~, anything
with a #, a colon-space or an edge space - and a value that was already quoted stays quoted. A
test round-trips each of those through the parser and asserts it reads back identical.

TWO GUARDS ON THE DISK

The file is re-read and compared immediately before writing. If it changed underneath - a text
editor, a git pull, a make update_repo - the save is refused and names that, because the
replacement was spliced from offsets into the old text and writing it would discard the change
wholesale rather than merge with it.

The write goes through a temporary file in the same directory and an atomic move. A crash or a
full disk during a plain write leaves a truncated configuration, which breaks every ODK target at
once. The same directory matters: an atomic move across filesystems is not atomic, and the system
temporary directory is usually on a different one.

TWO THINGS THE RESEARCH GOT WRONG, CAUGHT BY MEASURING

The design for this was mapped by reading the real code and the real file, and two of its
findings were false. Recording both, because trusting either would have shipped a defect.

"snakeyaml is not available" - it is, and has been in every release. robot-core declares it at
compile scope and snakeyaml-1.31.jar is an entry in the shipped bundle. The code comment
justifying the old regex, "a parser for six keys is not worth a 104th jar", described a
trade-off that did not exist.

"Mark.getIndex() is a codepoint index" - it is a char index, in the copy this build resolves.
Measured on a file of 39 chars and 38 codepoints containing an emoji: the raw index selects
"mwo" correctly, and converting through offsetByCodePoints selects "wo" and a newline. The first
version of this class did convert, and so introduced exactly the off-by-one corruption the
conversion was written to prevent. A test with an emoji in it is what caught it.

A THIRD THING THE COMPILER SAID

snakeyaml arrives twice: as robot-core's dependency, and bundled inside protege-editor-owl - an
older copy, which wins on the classpath. ScalarNode.getScalarStyle() and
LoaderOptions.setProcessComments do not exist there. So this uses the legacy getStyle() and no
LoaderOptions at all, and the fact that it compiles is the proof of compatibility: the build
resolves Protege's copy, so anything that compiles works against either. The same
two-copies-one-package trap that Explanations documents for ProtegeExplanationOrderer.

DOCUMENTATION REMOVED RATHER THAN CORRECTED

docs/features.md was 1,250 lines documenting the web application, and said so in its own second
line - but index.md and the README both linked it as "what the plugin does, feature by feature",
a description this session introduced. In a plugin-only repository a manual for software that is
no longer here is worse than no manual, so it is gone; it remains in the history at the tag
web-app-final. What genuinely describes the plugin - odk-workflow.md, limitations.md,
feature-parity.md, compared-with-ontograf.md - stays.

NUMBERS

1547 tests, 0 failures, 1 skipped. 18 new: thirteen for reading and splicing, five for the two
disk guards.

The skip is BundleConfigurationTest's manifest test, which skips after a clean when target/ holds
no jar.

A menu slot collision was caught by MenuStructureTest rather than by a user finding two items on
top of each other.

WHAT THIS DOES NOT DO

Reading and writing are not the same as honouring. Five scalars drive the generated-project
regenerator; import_group, release_artefacts, robot_report and uribase are shown and saved and
still acted on by nothing. Making the plugin obey its own configuration is the next piece, and
it is larger than this one.

There is no way to add a key that is not already in the file, and no raw-text editing. Both were
left out on purpose: a free-text pane would reintroduce whole-file rewriting through the back
door, which is the problem this release exists to avoid.

STILL OPEN

Running project scripts from src/scripts, exposing the 123 bundled design patterns, and the
choice between date-based and semantic-version releases. All three were mapped against the real
code at the same time as this one; none is implemented.
