OntoBoard 1.81.0 - host smoke receipt

Produced by tools/smoke.ps1 -SelfTest.

  2026-10-05  Protege 5.6.9  OWL API 4.5.29  JRE Temurin 11.0.25  -Xmx500M  PASS  check 8/8  test 10/10
  2026-10-05  Protege 5.5.0  OWL API 4.5.9   JRE 1.8.0_121        -Xmx500M  PASS  check 8/8  test 10/10


A PROJECT'S OWN SCRIPTS CAN BE RUN FROM INSIDE PROTEGE

Asked for directly: "it should be possible that users have scripts and it should be run
everything inside the protege". Nothing in the plugin read, listed or ran src/scripts, and the
documentation said so in as many words - "you cannot run an arbitrary project script from inside
Protege today".

OntoBoard > Project > Run a project script... now lists what is there and runs the one you pick.

THEY ARE NOT A PERIPHERAL DIRECTORY

Worth saying because the feature looks like a convenience and is not. A real ODK Makefile sets

    SHELL = $(SCRIPTSDIR)/run-command.sh

so every recipe line of a 767-line build already executes through a script in this directory.
Running one by hand is the same kind of act as running a target, which is why the route, the
mount and the heap settings come from the same code that builds a target rather than from a
second composition that would drift from it.

THE CONTAINER IS THE NORMAL ROUTE, NOT THE FALLBACK

Decided by measurement. All three scripts in the real project this was built against need
something that exists only inside obolibrary/odkfull:

    run-command.sh         calls /usr/bin/time
    update_repo.sh         calls /tools/odk.py
    validate_id_ranges.sc  is an Ammonite script, needing amm

Zero of three would run on the machine they are checked out on. So the order is container, then
a native ODK environment, then this machine - and "run it here" is last because offering it
first would be offering a failure. What runs a script comes from its #! line, or from its
extension when it has none; a script with neither is listed but not offered, because guessing an
interpreter produces a confident wrong answer.

THE COMMAND IS SHOWN BEFORE IT RUNS

This is the only place in OntoBoard that runs code somebody else wrote and OntoBoard has not
inspected. The confirmation names the route, prints the exact argv, carries any warning, and
says plainly that the script runs with your permissions and can change the project. Nothing
starts until you agree to that particular command. The plugin already shows the command for a
build as a courtesy; here it is the point.

THE LINE-ENDING WARNING EXISTS BECAUSE THE FAILURE LIES

All three scripts in that project have CRLF endings. A shell in a Linux container reading a
script whose first line ends \r reports

    cannot execute: required file not found

which reads as a missing interpreter and sends people looking for the wrong thing. So it is
detected and named before the run, with git's core.autocrlf identified as the usual cause - and
only for the container and native routes, since a Windows host runs such a script perfectly
well.

TWO BUGS THE REAL PROJECT FOUND THAT THE FIXTURES DID NOT

The tests passed, 18 of them, before this was ever pointed at mwo. Pointing it there produced:

    docker run ... obolibrary/odkfull sh /work/src/ontology/../scripts/run-command.sh

The .. is cosmetic - mwo declares SCRIPTSDIR = ../scripts - but it appears in the one dialog
whose whole purpose is that a human can read the command and check it, and a path with .. in the
middle is harder to check. Looking at why it was there found the real defect underneath:
containerPathOf compared getAbsolutePath() strings, which do not resolve .., with a bare
startsWith and no separator. Two paths the container cannot see were therefore accepted and
mapped to plausible /work/... paths:

    <root>/../elsewhere/x.sh   begins with the root's text, climbs out of it
    <root>-backup/x.sh         begins with the root's text, different directory

Both now resolve before the comparison, and the separator is required. The method's own comment
had promised exactly this - "returning null rather than guessing ... because a path the
container cannot see would fail inside it with a message about the file rather than about the
mount" - and the code did the opposite. Three tests pin it.

A DECISION THAT READ A PREFERENCE

planFor looked the native ODK environment up itself, through java.util.prefs. A test for "there
is no route, refuse and advise" would then pass or fail depending on whether the machine running
it happened to have that preference set. It is a parameter now, like the container runtime and
the interpreter already were, and the action resolves it. Everything the decision depends on is
an argument, which is the only reason it can be tested without launching anything - and for a
class whose job is to run arbitrary code, not launching anything during the tests is not a small
point.

LIMITS, STATED

A script gets 15 minutes against a build's 45. A build is a known quantity that legitimately
takes an hour; a script is arbitrary code somebody has just chosen to run, and there is still no
way to cancel a running child process, so the timeout is the only thing that ends a runaway.

Arguments cannot be passed. A script that needs them is better reached as a make target, and
adding an argument field to a dialog that also promises "this is the exact command" would make
that promise harder to keep.

NUMBERS

1568 tests, 0 failures, 1 skipped. 21 new, counted three ways and agreeing: the Maven summary,
the sum over the surefire reports, and an anchored grep for @Test.

34/34 classes named in plugin.xml load on both hosts, up from 33 - the new action among them.

The skip is BundleConfigurationTest's manifest test, which skips after a clean when target/
holds no jar.

DOCUMENTATION CORRECTED, NOT ONLY EXTENDED

docs/odk-workflow.md said "you cannot run an arbitrary project script from inside Protege
today", and three other claims on that page had gone stale when 1.80.0 shipped the YAML editor:
"Making it visible and editable inside Protege is the next piece of work", a table row reading
"No editor for the YAML", and a roadmap whose first two items were both already done. All four
fixed. A page that overstates what a tool does is the failure this project keeps guarding
against; a page that understates it by a release is the same failure facing the other way.

STILL OPEN

The 123 bundled design patterns, still exposed nowhere in the plugin. The choice between
date-based and semantic-version releases. Pinned tooltips and an imports graph from the OntoGraf
survey. Passing arguments to a script, and cancelling one.
