OntoBoard 1.82.0 - host smoke receipt

Produced by tools/smoke.ps1 -SelfTest.

  2026-10-05  Protege 5.6.9  OWL API 4.5.29  JRE Temurin 11.0.25  -Xmx500M  PASS  check 9/9  test 10/10
  2026-10-05  Protege 5.5.0  OWL API 4.5.9   JRE 1.8.0_121        -Xmx500M  PASS  check 9/9  test 10/10


THE PATTERN LIBRARY

Asked for: "I want to have a pattern repository to import ODPs to the ontology, and have these
patterns, separated by the source, and uses ODK to import terms from the pattern." The 123
patterns were already in the repository, in a directory the plugin never opened and the jar
never carried.

ROBOT > Pattern library... now browses them and imports terms from one.

SEPARATED BY PUBLISHER, BECAUSE THE COLLECTION IS ONE BUCKET

The obvious reading of "separated by the source" is the metadata's own source field, and that
field says ontologydesignpatterns.org for all 123 - every one came from a single harvest of the
ODP portal. Grouping by it would be truthful and useless.

The portal is a catalogue of submissions. The IRI each pattern declares for itself names who
actually published it, and there are thirteen:

    81  ontologydesignpatterns.org        3  delicias.dia.fi.upm.es
     9  ecareathome-ontology.mpi...        2  irit.fr
     6  semantic.cs.put.poznan.pl          2  descartes-core.org
     5  w3id.org                           2  daselab.org
     4  purl.org                           1  semanticweb.org
     4  mklab.iti.gr                       1  kastle-labl.org
     3  unknown

So the model carries both: collection, where OntoBoard got it, and publisher, who wrote it. The
browser groups by publisher, and the three unknowns sort last rather than between two real ones.

IMPORTING A PATTERN IS IMPORTING TERMS

Choosing a pattern hands it to ROBOT > Import terms..., which already extracts the module,
writes the term list, saves the module, adds the import and adds the catalog entry. Those five
steps carry four guards, each written after the corresponding mistake - a shared module filename
silently overwriting an earlier import, a stale module left in Protege's manager, a missing
catalog entry that resolves for its author and nobody else. A second implementation would start
with none of them, so there is not one: ImportTermsAction gained a seedWith, and the library
fills it in.

This also decides what arrives. 101 of the 123 patterns declare owl:imports - 76 to the ODP
annotation schema, four to DUL, many to sibling patterns. Copying a pattern file into a project
would drag an upper ontology in behind it; extracting a module takes the terms chosen and the
axioms that give them meaning, and the details pane says so for any pattern that imports
anything.

THE SHIPPED METADATA IS WRONG ABOUT THE THING A CHOOSER DISPLAYS

Every pattern ships a class_count and a property_count. Measured against the files:

    41 of 123 class_count wrong     affordance says 2, has 8
                                    eventprocessing says 8, has 17
                                    vesselspecies says 0, has 5
    17 of 123 property_count wrong  eventprocessing says 22, has 36
                                    smarthome-timeinterval says 1, has 4

A chooser that states a pattern's size is making a claim, and a third of those claims would
have been false. So the index carries no counts at all and they are computed from the OWL file
when a pattern is opened. A test asserts affordance shows eight and not two.

TEN OF THE 123 ARE ANOTHER ONE UNDER A SECOND NAME

Found two ways, because neither finds all of them. Five pairs have an identical signature - the
same file twice. Four more declare the same ontology IRI while differing slightly. Together:

    agentrole = agent-role                partof = part-of
    collection-entity = collection        spatial-object = place
    collectionentity = collection         timeinterval = time-interval
    contentops = actuation-actuator-effect   topic = simpletopic
    reportingnewsevent = newsreportingevent
    food-recipe-ingredient-substitution-ontology-design-pattern = ...-odp

The library lists 123 entries and holds 113 patterns. Each duplicate names its original, because
importing both would import the same terms twice. A file: IRI is never treated as evidence:
three patterns carry an absolute path from the machine the harvest ran on, and grouping on that
would relate them for no better reason than having been harvested together.

TWO PATTERNS THAT WOULD HAVE FAILED ONLY IN THE SHIPPED JAR

The nastiest finding here. Both airline patterns declare

    owl:imports file:/schemas/cpannotationschema.owl

Read from a file, that resolves to a file: IRI, fails to fetch, and the silent missing-import
setting swallows it. Read from a stream with no document IRI - which is the only way the plugin
ever reads them - it becomes urn:absolute:/schemas/cpannotationschema.owl, no factory handles
that scheme, and the exception thrown is not a missing import, so nothing silences it. Those two
patterns would not have opened.

It was invisible to every test that read the directory, and it only showed up when the tests
were pointed at the packaged resources. Fixed by giving the stream a file: document IRI, so an
unresolvable import fails the way the strategy expects. A test names both patterns and the
reason.

A WRONG ANSWER ABOUT THE MOUNT, FOUND THE SAME WAY

Not in this feature, but found while measuring it and fixed in 1.81.0: containerPathOf compared
unresolved absolute paths with a bare startsWith, so <root>/../elsewhere/x.sh and
<root>-backup/x.sh were both mapped into /work. Recorded here because it is the same lesson - the
code was correct against its fixtures and wrong against a real project.

AN INDEX, BECAUSE A JAR CANNOT BE LISTED

The library needs to know what it holds, and ClassLoader.getResource on a directory gives a
bundle: URL under Felix that cannot be enumerated - the trap ReportQueries already documents for
ROBOT's own report queries. So patterns/index.tsv lists them, generated by the same class that
reads it, and a test rebuilds it from the directories and fails if it has gone stale. A pattern
added without reindexing breaks the build instead of going missing in silence.

Seventeen descriptions began with "Diagram (this article has no graphical representation)" or
"Diagram | Intent: |" - section headings the harvest swept off the wiki page. Those are stripped.
For eight of them the heading was the entire field, so after cleaning there is nothing; two are
rescued by their competency questions and six show no description at all, which is the honest
answer.

THE SELF-CHECK NOW OPENS A PATTERN

Eight checks became nine. The new one lists the library and parses one pattern, inside Felix,
in the real Protege. Unit tests read target/classes through Maven's loader and prove the files
are correct while proving nothing about whether the bundle can reach them; if the resources were
left out of the jar the only symptom would be a menu item opening an empty window. Both hosts
report "123 patterns indexed, and actingfor parsed to 2 classes, 2 properties".

NUMBERS

1605 tests, 0 failures, 0 skipped. 37 new, counted three ways and agreeing.

35/35 classes named in plugin.xml load on both hosts, up from 34.

The jar grew 340 KB for 123 ontologies and an index - 2.5 MB of XML compresses well.

A 729-LINE MANUAL FOR SOFTWARE THAT IS NOT HERE

docs/architecture.md documented the deleted web application - five Docker services, a database
schema, an authentication flow, an API surface, and "13 bundled ODPA patterns" reached through
/api/patterns. It said "Scope: the web application" in its own second line, exactly as
features.md did before it was removed for the same reason, and the docs site still linked it
under "Going deeper". It is gone; it remains in the history at the tag web-app-final. Writing
the pattern documentation is what surfaced it, because the new page would have contradicted it.

Three further claims were corrected rather than added to: feature-parity.md listed the pattern
library as the third thing to build and as "13 patterns", and said what remains "is the ODK
pattern library, the SPARQL panel, ...".

WHAT THIS DOES NOT DO

The collection is fixed at build time. There is no way to add your own pattern, and no way to
point at another repository - the materialdigital patterns mentioned alongside the request are
not here. The model has a collection field so a second one can be added without rework, but
nothing populates it yet.

Nothing reads a pattern's competency questions back into the ontology, and the library does not
know what you have already imported, so it will not tell you that you imported this one last
week.

STILL OPEN

The choice between date-based and semantic-version releases. Pinned tooltips and an imports
graph from the OntoGraf survey. Passing arguments to a script, and cancelling one. Editing a
list or a nested block in the ODK YAML.
