OntoBoard 1.83.0 - host smoke receipt

Produced by tools/smoke.ps1 -SelfTest.

  2026-10-05  Protege 5.6.9  OWL API 4.5.29  JRE Temurin 11.0.25  -Xmx500M  PASS  check 9/9  test 10/10
  2026-10-05  Protege 5.5.0  OWL API 4.5.9   JRE 1.8.0_121        -Xmx500M  PASS  check 9/9  test 10/10


THE ONTOGRAF SURVEY IS FINISHED

docs/compared-with-ontograf.md was written by reading ontograf-2.0.3.jar - its plugin.xml, its
classes, its enums - and listed five things OntoGraf had that OntoBoard did not. Four were
judged worth building. This release is the last two:

    1. tooltip sections: superclasses, equivalents, disjoints    1.74.0
    2. export as GraphViz DOT                                    1.79.0
    3. pinned tooltips                                           1.83.0
    4. an imports graph                                          1.83.0

The fifth, save-and-reopen a named graph, is covered differently and deliberately: OntoBoard
persists the board to a sidecar automatically, so nobody loses work by forgetting to save.

PINNED TOOLTIPS

Select a term and press P; Shift+P clears them. OntoGraf's PinTooltipsAction keeps a tooltip
open after the pointer leaves, and the reason to want it is comparing - a hover tooltip vanishes
on exit, so holding "what is A a subclass of" next to "what is B disjoint from" was a matter of
memory.

On the selection rather than on what is under the pointer. That is the decision that makes the
feature do its job: selecting two terms and pressing P puts both cards up at once, which is the
whole point, and it means the feature is reachable from the keyboard.

Four at a time. Without a limit a stray keypress spree covers the board, and the way out is not
obvious - every card is sitting on top of the thing you would click to unpin it. Past four the
oldest closes, never the newest: the card just asked for is the one wanted, and dropping it
would read as a broken key.

A card is dropped when its cell leaves the board. Otherwise it stays where that term used to be
and keeps describing it - everything on it true, none of it about anything present.

The text comes from the same string the hover tooltip shows, converted from HTML rather than
written again. Every sentence in CanvasTooltips was argued over once; a second copy would drift,
the pinned card would keep saying something the tooltip had stopped saying, and only somebody
comparing the two would ever find out.

Like every other overlay here, a pinned card does not appear in an exported PNG or SVG -
CanvasExport renders from the graph model and never calls the component's paint. That is right
rather than a limitation: a pinned card is something opened while reading, not part of the
diagram being published.

THE IMPORTS GRAPH, AND AN HONEST MEASUREMENT OF IT

Project > Imports graph... draws the owl:imports closure, root filled, unresolved dashed and
red, with a Copy as DOT button. It is the only place in the plugin that will say a module is
imported by more than one other - the table lists direct imports one row each, so a shared
mirror is invisible in it.

Then it was pointed at the real project, and the result is worth recording rather than
burying:

    nodes 5   edges 4   unresolved 0   shared 0   depth never exceeds 1

MWO's imports are flat. The graph is a star, and for that project the table already said
everything the picture does. The feature earns its place on a project whose modules import a
shared mirror - the structure module_type: mirror produces - and the documentation now says so
in those words instead of implying every project benefits.

An unresolved import is drawn as a node rather than left out. Omitting it would draw the project
as importing less than it declares, which is the opposite of what somebody opening an imports
graph wants to know. A cycle terminates: OWL permits one, and the project that has grown an
accidental cycle is exactly the one whose owner would open this.

A PROBE THAT MEASURED THE PROBE

First run reported all four of MWO's imports unresolved, which would have been a defect in the
model. It was not: the probe used AutoIRIMapper, which scans files for the IRI they declare for
themselves, and an ODK module is reached by the IRI the catalog maps - a different thing. With
the catalog parsed and mapped, all four resolve. Recording it because the wrong conclusion was
one line away, and it was the conclusion that would have sent me editing working code.

NUMBERS

1629 tests, 0 failures, 0 skipped. 24 new - 13 for pinning, 11 for the imports graph - counted
three ways and agreeing.

36/36 classes named in plugin.xml load on both hosts, up from 35.

DOCUMENTATION

compared-with-ontograf.md's heading was "What OntoGraf does that OntoBoard does not", which four
releases have made false. It is past tense now, each item says which release built it, and the
original reasoning is kept rather than replaced by a tick - the argument for building something
is worth more than the fact that it was built. The recommendation section, which was a list of
four things to do, now records that all four are done and carries the flat-imports measurement.

STILL OPEN

The choice between date-based and semantic-version releases - a question for the user, not a
piece of work. Passing arguments to a project script, and cancelling a running one. Editing a
list or a nested block in the ODK YAML. Adding your own pattern to the library, and a second
pattern collection.
