OntoBoard 1.86.0 - host smoke receipt

Produced by tools/smoke.ps1 -SelfTest.

  2026-10-06  Protege 5.6.9  OWL API 4.5.29  JRE Temurin 11.0.25  -Xmx500M  PASS  check 9/9  test 10/10
  2026-10-06  Protege 5.5.0  OWL API 4.5.9   JRE 1.8.0_121        -Xmx500M  PASS  check 9/9  test 10/10


THE COLLABORATION SERVER ACCEPTED EVERYONE

The serious finding of this release, and it was in a file nobody had changed since the web
application was deleted.

collab/server.mjs ran two ports onto ONE Y.Doc: Hocuspocus on 1234 for Yjs clients and the JSON
bridge on 1235 for the plugin, attached through openDirectConnection. Its own comment says why:
"a Protege user and a browser user are in one session rather than two that happen to look
alike."

The bridge checked its token and refused anonymous peers. The Hocuspocus handler did this:

    if (!token) return { user: { name: "anonymous", role: "viewer" } };
    try { ... } catch { return { user: { name: "anonymous", role: "viewer" } }; }

Hocuspocus authenticates a connection when onAuthenticate RETURNS. Throwing is the only way to
refuse one. So both the no-token path and the INVALID-token path admitted the connection, and
"viewer" was never enforced anywhere - it was a string in an object.

Since the two ports share the document, the bridge's check could simply be stepped around by
connecting to the other port. Anyone who could reach 1234 was a read-write peer on the document
the authenticated Protege users were editing.

bridge.mjs had even written the asymmetry down, in the doc comment on its own verifier: "Unlike
the Hocuspocus path this does NOT fall back to anonymous." The author saw it and treated it as
acceptable for that path, which it had stopped being the moment the two shared a document.

Fixed by giving both ports the same function. authenticate() and hocuspocusAuth() now sit
together in bridge.mjs, and the second is the first with a throw on it, so they cannot drift
apart again.

AND IT SIGNED WITH A SECRET PUBLISHED IN THIS REPOSITORY

    const SECRET_KEY = process.env.SECRET_KEY || "change-me-in-production";

Applied silently. A server started without the variable looked exactly like one started
correctly, and anybody who had read this repository could mint a token for it. The server now
refuses to start without SECRET_KEY and prints the command to set it.

A TEST THAT PASSED ON THE HALF THAT HAD THE GUARD

server-boot.test.mjs already asserted "refuses an unauthenticated peer rather than letting it
edit as nobody", and it passed before this release - because it speaks to the bridge. Nothing
covered the other port. That is the shape of the whole defect: a guard tested on the side that
had it.

Ten new tests. Nine on the Hocuspocus decision directly - no token, empty token, wrong secret,
expired token, valid token, the role default, that refusals are logged and successes are not,
and that it agrees with the bridge - and one that the server exits rather than starting with no
secret. 55 tests in collab/, up from 45.


THE DOCUMENTATION SENT USERS TO A SERVICE THAT WAS DELETED

docs/collaboration.md still ran the reader through the web application at every step. Following
it, live mode was unreachable:

  step 2   docker compose exec backend printenv SECRET_KEY   - no compose file, no backend
  step 3   curl POST http://your-server:8000/auth/login      - no such endpoint
  step 3   raise ACCESS_TOKEN_EXPIRE_MINUTES on the backend  - no such service
  item 5   docker compose logs collab                        - no compose file

The token is genuinely required, so step 3 was a wall. The working procedure existed the whole
time in the sibling page docs/testing-collaboration-locally.md, which collaboration.md never
linked to.

Rewritten: one service, one secret, and a token minted with the jsonwebtoken that is already a
dependency.

SIX FURTHER CLAIMS ON THAT PAGE, MEASURED AND WRONG

Each checked against the code rather than taken from a list.

  "the seventeen types"          OntologyOperation.TYPES holds eighteen
  "individuals created or
   deleted" travels              there is no removeIndividual in the vocabulary, so a deleted
                                 individual stays on the peer's copy
  annotations omitted            updateAnnotation travels - notes, definitions, provenance
  moving a node travels          positions are sent when a node is created; a later drag is local
  "Your name" field              the dialog deliberately has none; the name is the token's sub
  token stored under ~/.java
   "on macOS and Linux"          macOS is a plist under ~/Library/Preferences, and the page
                                 claimed "the dialog says the same thing" - which it does not
  widen the vocabulary in
   three files                   two; the third was frontend/src/collab/useOperationSync.ts

The port table attributed 1234 to "the web application", and a "Without Docker:" heading
introduced an alternative to Docker instructions that were not on the page.

TWO MESSAGES THAT NAMED PLACES THAT DO NOT EXIST

Every "why you are not live" message said "Set one up in Tools > Collaboration Settings". There
has never been such an item - plugin.xml registers it as Collaboration... under the OntoBoard
menu - so a user who followed the sentence found nothing and had no second place to look. It
had been wrong since the sentence was written.

The settings dialog's success message said "Open the OntoBoard tab and press Collaborate",
describing a toolbar button that moved into the overflow menu when the bar stopped fitting.

Both corrected, and MenuPathsInMessagesTest now holds them there: it reads every menu path
named in a string literal in the source and checks a plugin.xml entry starts that way. Nothing
resolves such a string, so it cannot fail to compile and no test touched it. Verified by
putting the old sentence back and watching it fail, rather than by assuming it would.

It scans string literals rather than whole files, because the first version matched the comment
explaining the old wording and reported the fix as the bug.

STALE COMMENTS IN CODE, WHICH MISLEAD THE NEXT MAINTAINER

Both collab headers said ontology data is persisted through a backend REST API. bridge.mjs
named frontend/src/collab/useOperationSync.ts three times as the source of truth for the wire
format and the operation vocabulary. docs/development.md opened with "Two codebases... the web
application (backend/, frontend/, worker/, collab/)", documented ./run.sh and five services,
and gave the plugin's test count as 1207.

All corrected. The development guide's collaboration section now describes what is actually
there, including why both ports must demand the same credential.

A FINDING I DID NOT ACT ON, HAVING CHECKED IT

The audit reported that the 220px collaboration status label clips the messages it carries. It
does not, in practice: every message sent to it is short - "Working through git",
"Connecting...", "N changes not shared", "Disconnected - you switched ontology" - and the full
text is set as the tooltip on the same call. The long git-mode explanation goes to a dialog, not
to that label. Recorded because the finding was plausible and reading the call sites is what
settled it.

NUMBERS

1650 Java tests, 0 failures, 0 skipped. 2 new, counted three ways.
55 collab tests, up from 45.

36/36 classes named in plugin.xml load on both hosts.

HOW THIS WAS FOUND

A five-lens audit of the collaboration surface - docs against reality, the server standalone,
the Java client, the UI, and security - with each finding handed to a separate agent told to
refute it. 49 were raised. The ones acted on here were then re-checked by hand against the
files, which is how the 220px claim was dropped and how the Hocuspocus hole turned out to be
worse than reported: the finder called it an unauthenticated write path, and the thing that
makes it serious - that it shares a document with the port that does check - is three lines
further down the same file.

STILL OPEN

Several UI findings whose verification did not finish, none security-related: whether a dead
session and a retrying one are distinguishable at a glance, whether a peer joining is
announced, and what happens to queued edits when a user disconnects during an outage. Adding
your own pattern to the library, and a second collection. Editing a list or a nested block in
the ODK YAML.
