OntoBoard 1.87.0 - host smoke receipt

Produced by tools/smoke.ps1 -SelfTest.

  2026-10-07  Protege 5.6.9  OWL API 4.5.29  JRE Temurin 11.0.25  -Xmx500M  PASS  check 9/9  test 10/10
  2026-10-07  Protege 5.5.0  OWL API 4.5.9   JRE 1.8.0_121        -Xmx500M  PASS  check 9/9  test 10/10

Both hosts report "pattern library readable - 159 patterns indexed".


THE LIBRARY WAS 123 PATTERNS ABOUT SOMEBODY ELSE'S UPPER ONTOLOGY

Asked for: the patterns introduced by MWO, PMDco and NFDI MatWerk, with the source named, and
suggestions ranked against the open ontology.

The measurement that justified both halves, taken before either was built: of the 123 ODP
patterns, **zero** share a single IRI with a real BFO-based project. Not few - none. The ODP
collection and the OBO world have no vocabulary in common, so for somebody working in MWO or
PMDco the library was a catalogue of other people's modelling.

36 patterns added, and the collection is now a first-class field rather than one bucket:

    odp     123   the ODP portal, harvested earlier
    nfdi     15   nfdi.fiz-karlsruhe.de/matwerk/patterns/
    pmdco    13   materialdigital.github.io/core-ontology/docs/patterns.html
    mwo       8   ise-fizkarlsruhe.github.io/mwo/docs/patterns/

EVERY PATTERN IS NOW OWL AND TURTLE

Asked for directly. Those three pages document their patterns as prose and diagrams, so there
was nothing to ship: each one here was built by extracting its terms from the ontology it
belongs to, which makes it importable like any other entry rather than something to read and
copy by hand. Turtle was generated for all 159, the 123 originals included - RDF/XML is not
something anybody reads, and a pattern is meant to be read before it is imported.

A LOGICAL MODULE IS NOT A PATTERN

The design decision of this release, and it took measuring two wrong answers to reach.

ROBOT's STAR and BOT extraction are the right tools for an import: they guarantee the module
entails everything the source entails about the seeds. Pointed at these sources they produce
this:

    STAR   a PMDco pattern documented with 8 terms -> 119 classes, 1508 axioms
    BOT    the same pattern                        -> 121 classes, 1540 axioms
    36 patterns, either way                        -> 13-14 MB

Because a BFO-based ontology connects everything to the upper-ontology spine, and a logical
module has to follow it. 119 classes is a chunk of ontology.

A design pattern is not logically complete. It is a handful of terms and the relations between
them - what the diagram on the documentation page shows. So each pattern is the induced
sub-ontology: its own terms, every axiom mentioning only those terms, their labels and
definitions, and one level of parent above each so you can see where it sits without importing
BFO.

    INDUCED   6 to 26 classes each, 39 to 231 axioms, 1.5 MB in total

Checked by reading one rather than by trusting the numbers: mwo-process-agent-role came out as
Process, Agent and Role with participates in, has participant, bearer of, realizes, has role
and has realization, sixteen labels, and the BFO spine one level up. That is the documented
pattern.

HOW THE SEEDS WERE FOUND, AND HOW THEY WERE CHECKED

Three agents read the three pages and resolved each documented pattern to the IRIs it uses,
then one agent per pattern tried to confirm every IRI exists in the source file. The NFDI agent
was properly strict, rejecting 11 of 26 entries - the city, materials and metadata listings are
spreadsheet rows from a generated workbook, not reusable modelling decisions, and several others
name a defining class that is simply not in nfdicore.owl.

Twelve of those checks died on a weekly limit, so the same question was then asked
deterministically instead: load each ontology, test set membership of every seed IRI against its
signature. All 36 patterns had every seed confirmed - 100% - and the agents' own verdicts agreed
once they could be re-run. Set membership is not a judgement call, and a script is the better
tool for it.

That check also found something the agents could not: four patterns documented by MWO are built
entirely from NFDIcore vocabulary, because MWO imports an extracted *module* of NFDIcore rather
than the whole thing, so the full file has terms MWO's copy does not. Those are extracted from
nfdicore.owl while still being credited to the MWO page - 'collection' is who documented the
pattern, 'extracted_from' is where its terms live, and collapsing the two would credit the wrong
project.


SUGGESTIONS, RANKED AGAINST THE OPEN ONTOLOGY

The browser's first ordering is now "Suggested for this ontology". Pointed at the project these
patterns came from, the top ten are its own eight documented patterns plus two NFDI ones, every
one at 100% exact-IRI coverage - which is the right answer, and was not obtainable before this
release because none of the 123 matched anything.

THE REASON IS THE FEATURE

A ranked list with no evidence is a magic box. Each suggestion says "3 of its 4 terms are
already in your ontology: Agent, Role, hasRole" - checkable, where 0.75 is not. Where the
ontology has a label for a matched term its own label is used, because BFO_0000004 tells nobody
anything and "independent continuant" does.

THREE THINGS THE MEASUREMENTS OVERTURNED

1. The builtin vocabulary is not evidence. The first scoring looked like it worked: 43 of 123
   patterns "shared an IRI" with a real project. Every one of those matches was owl:Thing, which
   42 patterns declare. A signal that fires on everything ranks nothing. Had I shipped on that
   number the feature would have appeared to function.

2. Coverage, not count. Ranking by how many terms matched put a 195-term pattern first on
   twenty-five generic words - "object", "entity", "agent". Ranking by how much of the pattern
   the ontology covers puts Agent Role, Participation and Componency at the top, which is what a
   project about processes and roles should be offered.

3. It must not read the pattern files. Parsing them to answer one question took 24 seconds - a
   dialog that looks like it has hung, and it would have shipped that way, because nothing about
   the code looks slow and the cost only appears when something asks about every pattern at
   once. Caching helped the second call and left the first at 28 seconds. So each pattern's
   terms are stored in the index, generated from the files and compared against them by a test:
   24 seconds became 0.3.

   Storing derived data is what this project has twice caught other people getting wrong - 41 of
   the harvested class counts are false. The difference is that this list is generated by our
   own code and a test rebuilds it and fails on a mismatch. Derived data is safe exactly when
   the derivation is reproducible and checked.

A DEFECT THAT WOULD HAVE FAILED CI AND NOT ME

The terms column came out holding

    file:/C:/Users/eno/.../protege-plugin/../patterns/airline/pattern.owl#hasAircraft

airline/pattern.owl declares no usable ontology IRI, so its hasAircraft resolves against
wherever the file happens to be. The index was therefore unreproducible by construction: the
same checkout on another machine generates a different one, and the test that rebuilds and
compares would have gone red on CI while passing here - the worst way round. The same file is
malformed, its DOCTYPE missing a space, so the OWL API also contributed
org.semanticweb.owlapi/error#Error1 through Error6 to the signature.

Neither kind can ever match a term in anybody's ontology, so neither is evidence. Both are
excluded, and a test now asserts that nothing in the shipped index is true only on one machine.

Narrowing the column to classes and properties - an annotation property is not modelling - took
it from 451 KB to 298 KB and stopped the recommender offering IAO_0000115, "definition", as a
reason. Every OBO ontology has it; it is owl:Thing again in a different costume.

NUMBERS

1662 tests, 0 failures, 0 skipped. 12 new, counted three ways and agreeing.

159 patterns in the jar as .owl and as .ttl, plus the index. The jar grew 585 KB for 36
patterns and 159 Turtle files.

36/36 classes named in plugin.xml load on both hosts.

STILL OPEN

Adding your own pattern, or a fifth collection, without rebuilding the plugin. The library does
not know what you have already imported, so it will not say you imported this one last week -
and a suggestion scoring 1.00 means you already contain the whole pattern, which is a statement
that you have applied it rather than advice to adopt it. Editing a list or a nested block in the
ODK YAML. Three collaboration UI findings from the 1.86.0 audit, none security-related: whether
a dead session and a retrying one are distinguishable at a glance, whether a peer joining is
announced, and what happens to queued edits when a user disconnects during an outage.
