OntoBoard 1.88.0 - host smoke receipt

Produced by tools/smoke.ps1 -SelfTest.

  2026-10-07  Protege 5.6.9  OWL API 4.5.29  JRE Temurin 11.0.25  -Xmx500M  PASS  check 9/9  test 10/10
  2026-10-07  Protege 5.5.0  OWL API 4.5.9   JRE 1.8.0_121        -Xmx500M  PASS  check 9/9  test 10/10


THE ONE PLACE THE SOFTWARE PROMISED SOMETHING ABOUT YOUR DATA AND DID NOT DELIVER

Five findings from the 1.86.0 audit, all in the same family: things that failed quietly. The
first is the one that mattered.

RECONNECTION NEVER CAUGHT YOU UP

The bridge's hello handler attached an observer over event.changes.added - FUTURE additions - and
sent a welcome carrying the user and the peer list. The ops array holds the whole session log and
nothing ever sent it.

So the direction that worked was outbound only. The plugin queues its own edits while
disconnected and flushes them on reconnect, which is real and documented. Coming back the other
way there was nothing: a peer that dropped off received only what happened after it returned, and
a peer joining a session in progress received nothing at all - its board missing every axiom
agreed before it arrived, with nothing on screen to say so.

Two places said otherwise. CollabClient's javadoc: "Redelivery is normal after a reconnect - the
shared log is replayed". The docs table: "Works offline | queues and catches up". The client's
deduplication ledger had been written for a replay that never came - the guard was correct and
guarding nothing.

The bridge now sends the log on join, after the welcome.

Uncapped, deliberately. The document is ephemeral - it holds one session's operations and dies
with the server - so a cap would reintroduce exactly the quiet loss being fixed, for the oldest
edits instead of all of them. A session long enough for the replay to be slow is a visible
performance symptom, which is a better failure than silently missing axioms.

Sent after the observer is attached, so an operation pushed during the replay is duplicated
rather than dropped. The client deduplicates by operation id and SEEN_LIMIT is 2000, so a repeat
costs nothing; a gap would be unrecoverable. A reconnecting peer gets its own earlier operations
back too, which is the point - filtering them would mean a peer that reconnected could never
recover its own work.

A FLUSH INTO A DYING SOCKET DESTROYED THE QUEUE

    flush = new ArrayList<>(pending);
    pending.clear();                      // under the lock
    ...
    for (op : flush) send(operation(op)); // outside it, and send() swallowed failures

Up to PENDING_LIMIT - 200 - edits, gone. The queue was already clear, each failure was logged at
debug, and the next reconnect had nothing left to send. Those are precisely the edits made while
offline, which is the only reason the queue exists.

send() now reports whether the frame left, and anything unsent goes back on the front of the
queue in order - the tail of a broken flush is not sent, because order is part of the merge and
sending it would reorder the user's edits.

The comment justifying the old behaviour was wrong about its own reasoning: "the operation is
already in `seen`, so nothing here needs to escalate". `seen` deduplicates operations arriving
FROM the bridge. It has no bearing on redelivering one that failed to leave.

AN UNREADABLE EDIT LOOKED LIKE A FEATURE

A frame shaped like an operation whose payload would not decode returned Kind.UNKNOWN, the same
value as "a message type this version does not understand" - which the client ignores at debug
level, correctly, because otherwise a newer server adding a frame type breaks every older plugin.

The two needed opposite treatment and shared a branch. There is now a MALFORMED_OPERATION kind:
an unknown type stays silent, a lost edit reaches the toolbar with a count. One is a glitch,
forty means the two ends disagree about the wire format.

A REJECTED ADDRESS THREW AWAY YOUR TOKEN

The settings dialog answered a validation failure with `return show(parent, ontologyIri)` - a
fresh dialog built from the STORED settings. A typo in the server address discarded everything
typed in that sitting, including a token pasted from elsewhere, which is the one field nobody can
retype from memory. It is a loop over the same components now, so a correction is a correction.

AND THE HINT I MISSED IN 1.86.0

The Access token field still read "From the web application". That release fixed the same class
of bug in three other places - the git-mode message, the settings success message, and the docs -
and missed the one field live mode cannot start without. It now describes a JWT signed with the
server's SECRET_KEY.


A TEST THAT PASSED ON STALE CLASSES

Worth recording because it nearly hid a real defect. Adding an abstract method to
CollabClient.Listener must break its implementers; `mvn -q test-compile` reported success. The
IDE's language server had already written classes into target/test-classes, so Maven saw nothing
to do - the exact trap docs/development.md warns about under "Always clean". Deleting
target/test-classes produced the expected error.

A TEST THAT CAUGHT ITS OWN BUG

The MALFORMED_OPERATION test failed on first run. The cause was not the test: an earlier edit to
CollabClient had aborted before writing, so the enum constant existed and the switch had no case
for it - it fell to `default`, grouped with UNKNOWN, and stayed silent. The test was written for
exactly that failure and found it.

A TEST THAT PASSED INTERMITTENTLY

The queue test asserted replacement.received.size() >= 5 immediately after the queue drained.
getPendingCount() reaching zero says the client finished writing; the bridge receiving is a
separate hop. It failed once and passed on the next run, which is how it was noticed. It waits
for the condition now, and three consecutive runs are clean - a test that passes most of the time
is worse than no test.

NUMBERS

1667 Java tests, 0 failures, 0 skipped. 5 new, counted three ways.
59 collab tests, up from 55: four for the catch-up, including that the welcome precedes it and
that an empty session replays nothing.

Three existing CollabMessages tests changed verdict rather than being deleted, because the
contract they pinned is the one that was wrong. A fourth was added to hold the other half: an
unrecognised message type is still UNKNOWN, so the distinction cannot quietly collapse back.

36/36 classes named in plugin.xml load on both hosts. 159 patterns indexed.

STILL OPEN

From the same audit, three low-severity findings: node moves do not travel and the UI does not
say so, nothing in the product tells you how to obtain a server, and "N changes not shared" is
erased by the next reconnect. The 220px status label finding was checked and refuted - every
message sent to it is short and the full text is its tooltip.

Then: editing a list or a nested block in the ODK YAML, a term-list editor, acting on what the
YAML says, and contributing a pattern without rebuilding the plugin.
