OntoBoard 1.89.0 - host smoke receipt

Produced by tools/smoke.ps1 -SelfTest.

  2026-10-07  Protege 5.6.9  OWL API 4.5.29  JRE Temurin 11.0.25  -Xmx500M  PASS  check 9/9  test 10/10
  2026-10-07  Protege 5.5.0  OWL API 4.5.9   JRE 1.8.0_121        -Xmx500M  PASS  check 9/9  test 10/10


EVERY SCALAR IN THE ODK YAML IS NOW EDITABLE, AT ANY DEPTH

The gap this closes was the first item on the page's own roadmap: import_group,
release_artefacts and robot_report were shown read-only, which is where most of the
custom-import workflow still left Protege. Measured on mwo-odk.yaml:

    before   13 values listed,  9 editable
    after    47 values listed, 36 editable

All twelve settings the ODK tutorial walks a user through can now be changed in Protege.
import_group.products[2].mirror_from, import_group.products[0].module_type,
robot_report.fail_on, robot_report.report_on[0], export_formats[1] - each one changes exactly
one line, verified against the real file.

IT WAS NOT A LIMIT OF THE TECHNIQUE

Worth recording, because this looked like hard work and was not. Editing splices a value's own
characters out of the original text. A scalar's span is exactly its own characters wherever it
sits, so a scalar two blocks down is no more dangerous to replace than a top-level one - the
walk simply never went past the top level, and withValue only scanned root tuples. The splice
that has been correct since 1.80.0 needed no change at all.

What genuinely cannot be spliced is a STRUCTURE, whose span covers everything inside it:
replacing import_group in place would delete every product under it. Those stay read-only while
their scalars are editable, which is the honest split rather than the convenient one.

THE TRAP THE DESIGN HAD TO AVOID

module_type appears under all four of MWO's imported products, and id under each as well. An
edit keyed by its leaf name would write one product's value into another's - silently, and into
a file nobody re-reads by hand. So every value carries a path, the dialog edits by path, and a
test asserts that changing import_group.products[0].module_type leaves products[1] alone.

A key containing a . or a [ would make a.b mean two things. No ODK configuration has one; such a
key is listed with no path and not offered for editing, because the alternative is an edit
landing on a key other than the one clicked.

Duplicate detection moved inside each mapping. Two `fail_on` inside robot_report are as
ambiguous as two at the top level, and the refusal now names the full path.

STILL NOT HERE

Adding or removing a list entry. Changing export_formats[1] is a splice; adding a third format
inserts a line, which is a different operation and a separate piece of work. The documentation
says so rather than implying the YAML is now fully editable.

Reading and writing is still not the same as honouring: only five scalars drive anything in
OntoBoard. That remains on the roadmap and the page says so.


THE STALE-CLASS TRAP, THREE TIMES IN TWO RELEASES

Recorded because it nearly shipped a defect and nearly hid two.

`mvn -q compile` reported success on a file containing an invalid escape sequence. The IDE's
language server had written a class carrying "Unresolved compilation problem" into
target/classes, so Maven saw nothing to do; the error only surfaced when the class was actually
run. In 1.88.0 the same thing reported a successful test-compile after an abstract method was
added to a public interface, which must break its implementers.

docs/development.md already says "Always clean" and explains why. The lesson it records is
exactly this, and it took three repeats in two releases for me to stop trusting a quiet
"COMPILED".

NUMBERS

1676 tests, 0 failures, 0 skipped. 9 new, counted three ways and agreeing.

All 13 pre-existing OdkYaml tests pass unchanged, which is the evidence that the generalisation
is backwards compatible: a top-level key is a one-step path, so every caller written against the
key-only API keeps working.

36/36 classes named in plugin.xml load on both hosts.

DOCUMENTATION CORRECTED IN THE OTHER DIRECTION

The key-by-key table added two releases ago - "six editable, six need a text editor" - is now
wrong the other way, and so was the step-6 verdict, the section-4 import row and the roadmap
item. All four updated. A page that understates what a tool does is the same failure as one that
overstates it, facing the other way; this one has now been wrong in both directions within three
releases, which is an argument for the measured tables rather than prose.

STILL OPEN

A term-list editor. Acting on what the YAML says. Contributing a pattern without rebuilding the
plugin. Three low-severity collaboration findings: node moves do not travel and the UI does not
say so, nothing in the product tells you how to obtain a server, and "N changes not shared" is
erased by the next reconnect.
