OntoBoard 1.90.0 - host smoke receipt

Produced by tools/smoke.ps1 -SelfTest.

  2026-10-07  Protege 5.6.9  OWL API 4.5.29  JRE Temurin 11.0.25  -Xmx500M  PASS  check 9/9  test 10/10
  2026-10-07  Protege 5.5.0  OWL API 4.5.9   JRE 1.8.0_121        -Xmx500M  PASS  check 9/9  test 10/10


A TERM LIST CAN BE EDITED WITHOUT LOSING WHAT IS WRITTEN IN IT

Project > Term lists... shows each import's <import>_terms.txt - every term, every comment, and
the label the open ontology gives it - and adds or removes a line. The second roadmap item on
the ODK page, and the file that makes refresh-imports mean anything: the module is an artefact,
the term list is the source.

THE MEASUREMENT THAT DECIDED THE DESIGN

OntoBoard has been able to write a term list from scratch since 1.38.0. The obvious
implementation was readTerms -> edit the list -> writeTerms, and it took one measurement to
reject it. On a real iao_terms.txt - 18 lines, 13 terms:

    terms read      13
    lines before    18
    lines after     16
    annotated lines no longer present   15

Every trailing "# label" comment, both of the file's own header lines, and the order re-sorted.
writeTerms produces a file from a template, which is right for a module just extracted and
wrong for one somebody maintains.

And there is nothing unusual about that file. Across the same project's five populated lists:

    event      1 term,   1 trailing comment,  4 comment lines
    iao       13 terms, 13 trailing comments, 2 comment lines
    obi        8 terms,  8 trailing comments, 1 comment line
    pmdco     28 terms, 28 trailing comments
    foaf       0 terms,                       4 comment lines

All 50 terms annotated, 11 standalone comment lines. So edits are spliced through a new
TermFile, line by line, the way OdkYaml splices the configuration. Measured on the same file:
adding a term keeps all 20 lines and adds exactly one; removing one loses only the line asked
for.

That is the fourth time this project has had to choose splicing over rewriting - the ID ranges
losing a Datatype declaration, the ODK YAML rewriting 28 of 41 lines, these files being
unreadable at all before 1.77.0, and now this.

WHAT IT GIVES YOU THAT A TEXT EDITOR DOES NOT

Each OBO number shown with its label, resolved over the imports CLOSURE. That word is the whole
trick: a term list names terms from other ontologies - that is what an import is - so the only
place they are declared is inside an import, and getEntitiesInSignature defaults to
Imports.EXCLUDED, which would have found none of them and left every row reading as a bare
number. The same trap is recorded in this project's notes from an earlier release; this is the
first time it was avoided rather than hit.

A line that was meant to be a term and is not is named, not skipped. Skipping means the module
is quietly missing it, and the person who typed it is the only one who can say what it should
have been.

A term added from the Protege selection carries its label as a trailing comment - but only if
the file already annotates every term. A file whose convention is a label on every line should
not acquire a bare entry, and a file with none should not acquire the project's first. The new
entry goes after the last term rather than at the end of the file, because a list commonly
closes with a comment and an entry under one would read as though that comment introduced it.

The same two disk guards as the configuration editor: re-read and compare before writing, then a
temporary file and an atomic move.

MY OWN GUARD CAUGHT MY OWN MESSAGE

MenuPathsInMessagesTest, added in 1.86.0, failed on this release's new code: the dialog's text
said "ROBOT > Import terms..." and the test could only see "ROBOT > Import", because the
sentence was split across two concatenated string literals and the test scans one literal at a
time.

A false alarm - but on a claim it genuinely could not verify. The fix was to keep the menu path
inside a single literal, which is a better message anyway. The alternative was to teach the test
to tolerate a partial match, and that would have weakened a guard that is working: it is the
only thing standing between a renamed menu item and a dialog that sends people nowhere. Left
strict, deliberately.

NUMBERS

1690 tests, 0 failures, 0 skipped. 14 new, counted three ways and agreeing.

37/37 classes named in plugin.xml load on both hosts, up from 36.

One test failure in writing them was mine, not the code's: the fixture used
String.join("\n", ..., "") and then appended another newline, so the file genuinely had a
trailing blank line and TermFile correctly reported seven lines where the test expected six.

NOT HERE

Reordering a list, editing a term in place - remove and add - and editing the comments
themselves.

STILL OPEN

Acting on what the YAML says: the file is read and written faithfully but only five scalars
drive anything. Contributing a pattern, or a fifth collection, without rebuilding the plugin.
Three low-severity collaboration findings: node moves do not travel and the UI does not say so,
nothing in the product tells you how to obtain a server, and "N changes not shared" is erased by
the next reconnect.
