OntoBoard 1.91.0 - host smoke receipt

Produced by tools/smoke.ps1 -SelfTest.

  2026-10-07  Protege 5.6.9  OWL API 4.5.29  JRE Temurin 11.0.25  -Xmx500M  PASS  check 9/9  test 10/10
  2026-10-07  Protege 5.5.0  OWL API 4.5.9   JRE 1.8.0_121        -Xmx500M  PASS  check 9/9  test 10/10


THE CONFIGURATION WAS READ, WRITTEN, PRESERVED - AND OVERRIDDEN

Three releases went into showing the ODK YAML, editing it faithfully and splicing it so a
one-word change stays one line. None of that made the plugin obey it. The documentation listed
the keys that drive nothing, which was honest, and left the worst case looking like a mere
omission.

It was not an omission. A containerised build ran with

    docker run ... -e ROBOT_JAVA_ARGS=-Xmx8G -e JAVA_OPTS=-Xmx8G ...

hardcoded. `-e` overrides the environment, so a project declaring robot_java_args: "-Xmx16G"
got 8G, silently - and on a large ontology that is the difference between a release that
finishes and one that dies in the reasoner. The plugin was overriding a setting the project had
written down specifically to avoid that.

AND THE ADVICE FOR IT COULD NOT WORK

When ROBOT ran out of memory the plugin said:

    "ROBOT ran out of memory. Give it more with ROBOT_JAVA_ARGS, for example -Xmx8G,
     before running the build."

Exporting ROBOT_JAVA_ARGS does nothing, because the next line of our own code passes -e
ROBOT_JAVA_ARGS over the top of it. Someone following that advice would have seen no change and
reasonably concluded ROBOT ignores its own setting.

Both fixed. The build uses the project's value, defaulting to -Xmx8G so a project without the
key behaves exactly as before, and the message now names robot_java_args, says that setting the
environment variable has no effect, and points at the editor that changes the key.

Worth recording that MWO declares "-Xmx8G" - the same as the hardcoded value - so this defect
was invisible on the one project everything here is measured against. It was found by reading
the line, not by running anything.

THE QUALITY REPORT NOW AGREES WITH THE PROJECT

ROBOT > Quality report... took profile.txt from the project by filesystem convention, with help
text promising that leaving it set "is what makes this report agree with what the project's CI
will say". It then ignored robot_report.fail_on and robot_report.use_labels, so the report could
take the project's profile and still disagree with the project's build about which findings
count as a failure. Both are read now, with ODK's upper-case ERROR normalised to what ROBOT
expects, and the labels checkbox defaults to the project's setting rather than to a preference
of OntoBoard's.

A CONFIG PROBLEM MUST NOT STOP A BUILD

Every read returns the documented default on any failure: no project, no file, unreadable YAML, a
duplicate key, or the path naming a list where a scalar was expected. A build that refused to
start because a configuration file had a problem somewhere else in it would be a worse tool than
one that used its default, and there are tests for all six cases.

The reader goes through OdkYaml, which 1.89.0 generalised to paths - so robot_report.fail_on is
a one-line lookup, and quoting, comments and nesting are handled by code already tested for
them rather than by a second regex. The two features compose: generalising the editor made
honouring the file cheap.

NUMBERS

1702 tests, 0 failures, 0 skipped. 12 new, counted three ways and agreeing.

37/37 classes named in plugin.xml load on both hosts, and the self-test still drives the quality
report end to end: 6 findings, 2 of them errors.

DOCUMENTATION

The "everything else is ignored" list lost three entries and gained a table saying what each one
now changes - including, in plain words, that the heap was previously overridden rather than
merely unread. The paragraph claiming fail_on and use_labels "are never read" is corrected, and
custom_profile is still listed as ignored, because the profile is found by looking rather than by
being told.

STILL OPEN

import_group, release_artefacts, export_formats and primary_release are still text OntoBoard
preserves and does not obey. Contributing a pattern, or a fifth collection, without rebuilding
the plugin. Three low-severity collaboration findings: node moves do not travel and the UI does
not say so, nothing in the product tells you how to obtain a server, and "N changes not shared"
is erased by the next reconnect.
