OntoBoard 1.93.0 - host smoke receipt

Produced by tools/smoke.ps1 -SelfTest.

  2026-10-08  Protege 5.6.9  OWL API 4.5.29  JRE Temurin 11.0.25  -Xmx500M  PASS  check 9/9  test 10/10
  2026-10-08  Protege 5.5.0  OWL API 4.5.9   JRE 1.8.0_121        -Xmx500M  PASS  check 9/9  test 10/10


THREE COLLABORATION FINDINGS, AND THE ONE THAT MADE THE FEATURE UNUSABLE

The three lowest-severity findings left over from the collaboration audit. One of them turned out
not to be low severity at all.

THERE WAS NO WAY TO GET A TOKEN

Live collaboration needs a server the group runs and one access token per person. The server is two
Node files in this repository and refuses to start without a SECRET_KEY, which it verifies every
token against. Nothing in the repository minted a token. The documentation gave this:

    node -e "console.log(require('jsonwebtoken').sign({sub:'alice'}, process.env.SECRET_KEY, {expiresIn:'12h'}))"

and the plugin's own dialog said the token came "from the web application" - a product retired six
releases earlier. So the one field a user cannot possibly guess pointed at nothing that exists, and
the actual procedure was a line of shell that cannot be named in a dialog, that a Windows shell
quotes differently from a POSIX one, and that silently mints an unusable token when SECRET_KEY
happens to be empty.

Live collaboration was, in practice, unreachable for anybody who had not read the source.

Now: collab/mint-token.mjs, and

    SECRET_KEY=<secret> npm run mint-token -- "Ada Lovelace" [--days N]

The token goes to stdout and everything else to stderr, so redirecting gives a file to send. It
refuses without a secret, refuses without a name, refuses a lifetime that is not a positive number,
and joins an unquoted name so a surname is not lost to the shell. 14 tests, and the one that
matters asserts that what this mints is what collab/bridge.mjs accepts - the two halves are in
separate files and nothing else would notice them drifting, which is exactly how the server came to
admit anonymous connections in the first place.

The dialog now names that command, names collab/, and names docs/collaboration.md.

"N CHANGES NOT SHARED" WAS ERASED BY EVERY RECONNECT

The notice that some of your edits never reached anybody was written into the same label as the
connection status. The next "Connected" overwrote it - and an automatic reconnect produces one. So
a green light could sit over a session in which three of the user's axioms had gone nowhere, and
the warning that said so had been wiped by the recovery.

This is the second time this view has made this mistake. 1.67.0 found the first: the transient
board confirmations and the session notices shared one label, whichever wrote last won permanently,
and arranging the board erased the same warning. The fix then was to split the labels. The bug
survived one level down, inside the session label itself, because the two statements were still the
same type in the same field.

So the lasting notices are now their own object, SessionNotices, with their own rules: the count
never decreases, and nothing clears it but the start of a new session - not a reconnect, and not a
disconnect either, because those edits are still unshared after the socket closes and clearing the
warning as the session ends would hide it at the moment it starts to matter: the user is about
to commit, and that warning is what tells them a commit is how their colleagues get these changes.
It has its own place in the status bar, on the right, which nothing else writes.

Pure, so the rules are testable - the same reason PeerGeometry is. The view itself needs a live
OWLEditorKit and cannot be constructed in a headless test, which is how the rule came to be
untested twice.

MOVING A NODE WAS IN THE DOCUMENTATION AND NOWHERE IN THE PRODUCT

Positions are shared, but only as a hint attached to the operation that creates a term; there is no
move operation in the vocabulary, and PeerGeometry deliberately refuses to overwrite a position the
receiving board already has so that a colleague adding a label cannot yank a node across somebody's
screen. Both halves of that are right.

What was wrong is that nothing said so. An unshareable axiom is counted and reported; arranging
thirty classes into a readable diagram produced no count, no message and no hint that the colleague
watching sees none of it. The docs listed it under "does not travel" while claiming in the next
paragraph that "the plugin does not hide this".

Dragging a node while connected now says so once per session, in the board's own transient line -
once, because dragging is the most repeated action on this canvas, and in the transient line
because the persistent one belongs to warnings that need acting on.

FIFTEEN MORE, FOUND BY REVIEWING THIS RELEASE BEFORE SHIPPING IT

Six reviewers over the 1.92.0 and 1.93.0 diff, each finding verified by two independent agents
instructed to refute it. 32 candidates, 17 refuted, 15 confirmed and fixed here. The ones worth
recording:

A PUBLISHED "MEASURED" NUMBER THAT DID NOT REPRODUCE. 1.92.0 said 112 of the shipped patterns
carry coversRequirements, 66 hasIntent, 65 rdfs:comment, 38 rdfs:label and 34 dc:creator. A
reviewer re-ran the measurement instead of reading the claim: 77, 73, 62, 36 and 13. The count
matched tag names inside the <Ontology> element with a regular expression, and in OWL/XML - which
every shipped pattern is - that element IS the whole document, so an annotation on any class was
counted as an annotation on the ontology. Corrected in docs/odk-workflow.md, in two javadocs, and
in the 1.92.0 receipt itself with a dated correction note rather than a silent edit. Only "6
dc:title" survived unchanged. Every ordering decision the numbers were cited to justify still
holds, which is luck, not vindication.

A REFUSED CONNECTION DESTROYED A STILL-TRUE WARNING. The whole point of SessionNotices is that
only a new session clears the count - and the clear was wired to where the session object is
CONSTRUCTED, not to where one is joined. So a bad token, or a server that is not running, wiped a
count that was still true of the ontology in front of the user: the remedy for "3 changes not
shared" was to attempt a session and fail. Now armed on connect and acted on in onJoined, behind a
flag, because onConnected fires again on every automatic reconnect and clearing there would have
reintroduced the exact bug this release exists to fix.

THE DIALOG SHOWED A COMMAND THE SCRIPT REJECTS. The new "where a server comes from" notice said to
run 'npm run mint-token -- <name>'. Swing's HTML renderer parses <name> as an unknown tag and drops
it, so the dialog displayed the command with the placeholder missing. And wrapped() pinned every
notice to 52px, which fitted the two that existed when it was written and cut the third off
mid-sentence - losing precisely the lines naming the command and the documentation. Both fixed; the
escaping now goes through a helper named for the hazard.

THE DOCUMENTED REDIRECTION DID NOT WORK. docs/collaboration.md promised that '> ada.txt' gives a
sendable token file. Measured: npm run writes four lines of its own banner to stdout, so the file
began with npm noise. The documented command is 'npm run --silent' now, and says why the flag is
there.

A STALE BANNER AND A WASTED PASS IN THE PATTERN BROWSER. The "Suggested: 3 of its 4 terms are
already in your ontology" box was filled only by the suggested ordering and emptied by nothing, so
it stayed on the details pane in every other ordering - and, because the action object outlives the
dialog, could assert a suggestion about an ontology no longer open. Separately, setting the initial
ordering fired the combo's listener, running a whole refill including the recommender against an
empty candidate list before anything had been scanned. One line each.

A ROOT THAT ENDS IN A SEPARATOR. File.getAbsolutePath() strips a trailing separator from every path
except a filesystem root, so a patterns folder of C:\ or / produced the prefix "C://" and matched
nothing: every contributed pattern reported collection "yours" however deep its folders went, and
its id collapsed to the basename. The case that matters is a drive letter mapped to a team's
pattern share - cheap to walk, never hits the file cap, quietly wrong about every collection. Fixed
with a test that runs through File.listRoots() so it exercises C:\ here and / on CI.

A SCRIPT THAT ANNOUNCED SUCCESS AND THEN CRASHED. mint-token's --days accepted any positive finite
number. Number("1e21") is one, and it stringifies to "1e+21", so the script printed "valid for
1e+21 day(s)" and then died inside jwt.sign with a stack trace. A whole number between 1 and 36500
now, with a test over every rejected form and a test that every accepted lifetime actually mints.

AND A JAVADOC POINTING AT THE WRONG GUARD. The ORDERINGS constant named PatternOrderTest as the
test that catches a missing ordering. That check had to move to the menu package - a test in the
pattern package cannot see a package-private constant in this one - and the javadoc was not
updated. A javadoc pointing at the wrong guard is how a guard gets deleted.

The scan still runs on the event thread when the browser opens; it now sets a wait cursor and the
file cap is what bounds it. Three reviewers disagreed about whether that is a defect and the
honest answer is that it is a cost, not a wrong answer.

NUMBERS

1744 tests, 0 failures, 0 skipped. 11 new Java tests, counted three ways and agreeing.
71 collab vitest tests, 0 failures. 15 new.

37/37 classes named in plugin.xml load on both hosts. Quality report end to end: 6 findings, 2 of
them errors. 159 patterns indexed.

DOCUMENTATION

docs/collaboration.md: the minting section is the command rather than a one-liner, with the reason
the one-liner was the wrong answer, and with --silent because without it the documented redirection
captures npm's banner. Troubleshooting no longer asks the reader to recall an expiresIn this
release removed from the user-facing path. docs/testing-collaboration-locally.md uses the command
too. docs/limitations.md: the status-bar correction, and the admission that moving a node was
reported nowhere.

"Toolbar" meant a status line that moved to the status bar in 1.68.0. An earlier draft of this
receipt claimed two files had been corrected; one occurrence in each had been, and nine more were
left. All of them are corrected now, across docs/collaboration.md, docs/limitations.md and
docs/testing-collaboration-locally.md - and the one remaining mention of a toolbar is the
Collaborate button, which really is in it.

STILL OPEN

The collaboration audit is now empty. What remains elsewhere: the pattern library does not know what
you have already imported, so it will suggest a pattern whose terms are in an import from last week
- and a score of 1.00 means precisely that without saying so. A contributed pattern gets no category
or domain, because nothing can infer one. import_group, release_artefacts, export_formats and
primary_release are still text OntoBoard preserves and does not obey, and inserting an element into
one of those lists still means a text editor.
