OntoBoard 1.98.0 - host smoke receipt

Produced by tools/smoke.ps1 -SelfTest.

  2026-10-08  Protege 5.6.9  OWL API 4.5.29  JRE Temurin 11.0.25  -Xmx500M  PASS  check 9/9  test 10/10
  2026-10-08  Protege 5.5.0  OWL API 4.5.9   JRE 1.8.0_121        -Xmx500M  PASS  check 9/9  test 10/10


THE RELEASE IS WRITTEN IN THE FORMATS THE PROJECT ASKS FOR

Roadmap item 2, in part. Project > Release... wrote one RDF/XML file whatever the project's
export_formats said.

The gap was one OntoBoard made for itself, which is what makes it worth fixing before the rest of
item 2. OdkScaffold writes export_formats into every project the plugin generates - so the plugin
created a configuration and then disagreed with it, and a release made from the menu was missing
artefacts the very project it had scaffolded declares. NFDIcore, measured rather than imagined,
asks for:

    export_formats:
      - owl
      - ttl

Now both are written, to both destinations the release already produced - the dated directory and
the project root - with one file name per format, so two formats cannot write over each other.
The result records which formats came from the project, so a release can be compared with what
make produced.

WHAT IT CANNOT WRITE, IT NAMES

ODK's format list is longer than what an OWL API writer produces. OBO Graphs JSON is ROBOT's own
converter rather than a document format, and this writes releases through the OWL API; a word that
is no ODK format at all is also possible in a hand-edited file. Either way the result warns, naming
the format as the project spelled it and saying who does produce it.

Skipping silently was the alternative and it is the worse one: a release missing a file somebody's
pipeline consumes is worse when nothing said it was missing.

NOTHING CHANGES FOR A PROJECT THAT SAYS NOTHING

No key, no project, unreadable YAML, a key that is not a list, a list with nothing writable in it -
all of them give one RDF/XML file, which is exactly what this wrote before. Reading the key cannot
change what an existing project's release looks like, and a configuration problem elsewhere in the
file cannot stop a release being written at all.

WHAT IS STILL NOT HONOURED, AND WHY IT IS NOT IN THIS RELEASE

release_artefacts and primary_release. NFDIcore declares base, full and simple with full as
primary, and those are three different CONTENT variants rather than three serialisations of one
ontology: base is the project's own axioms, full has the imports merged, simple is a reduced
version. Release already has "Merge the imports in" and "Leave the editorial notes out", which are
adjacent to two of them without being them.

Doing that properly is a larger job than a second writer, and doing it approximately would produce
files named base and simple that are not what ODK means by those words - which is worse than not
producing them, because a consumer cannot tell. Left for its own release, and the roadmap says so
in those terms.

import_group is also still unread. Adding a product to it works since 1.97.0; acting on one means
driving Refresh imports from it, which is its own piece of work.

NUMBERS

1816 tests, 0 failures, 0 skipped. 13 new, counted three ways and agreeing.

38/38 classes named in plugin.xml load on both hosts. Quality report end to end: 6 findings, 2 of
them errors. 163 patterns indexed.

The release path is not exercised by the host self-test - it writes files into a project and tags
a version, which a startup check must not do. What is covered is the format resolution, by
thirteen unit tests including the NFDIcore declaration copied from its own configuration file.

STILL OPEN

Roadmap item 2's remainder, above. Item 3: the pattern library knows nothing about what you have
already imported, so a recommendation scoring 1.00 means you already contain the whole pattern
without saying so. And, from the other roadmap: pull requests, Widoco, entity locking, and the
nine axiom kinds the live collaboration protocol cannot carry.
