OntoBoard 1.99.0 - host smoke receipt

Produced by tools/smoke.ps1 -SelfTest.

  2026-10-08  Protege 5.6.9  OWL API 4.5.29  JRE Temurin 11.0.25  -Xmx500M  PASS  check 9/9  test 10/10
  2026-10-08  Protege 5.5.0  OWL API 4.5.9   JRE 1.8.0_121        -Xmx500M  PASS  check 9/9  test 10/10


REFRESH IMPORTS READS THE PROJECT, NOT THE DIRECTORY

Roadmap item 2, the import_group half. Project > Refresh imports found its imports by listing
src/ontology/imports/ and read each one's upstream source from a "# Source:" comment at the top of
the term list.

That comment is OntoBoard's own invention - ImportModules.writeTerms puts it there. Measured
across four real ODK projects:

  nfdicore   9 term lists, 0 with a '# Source:' line
  mwo        4 term lists, 0
  pmdco     10 term lists, 0
  ecto      16 term lists, 0

Thirty-nine term lists, none of them carrying it. So the rebuild worked on projects OntoBoard had
created and on no real one, and every import of every real repository reported "has a term list
but does not record where its terms came from, so a refresh cannot know what to extract from".

The project said so all along, in the place ODK itself looks: import_group.products, where each
product names an id and either a mirror_from or nothing - and nothing means ODK downloads
$(OBOBASE)/<id>.owl.

WHAT CHANGED, IN NUMBERS, OVER THOSE FOUR PROJECTS

  rows                          39   (35 declared products + 4 on disk and undeclared)
  with a known source           35   (was 0)
  rebuilt by a refresh          15   (was 0)
  refused with a named reason   20
  on disk and undeclared         4

The 15 are the slme modules, and they are now extracted with the PROJECT's method and individuals
setting rather than this plugin's default - a project declaring module_type_slme: STAR and getting
BOT back would have had its module replaced by a larger one that no longer matches its own CI.

WHAT IT REFUSES, AND WHY REFUSING IS THE ANSWER

  custom        14   ODK's own generated rule for a custom module is three lines: two echoes
                     saying "This rule needs to be overwritten in <project>.Makefile" and @false.
                     ODK declines to build it generically, because the real command is
                     hand-written there - NFDIcore's swo rule runs a SPARQL preprocess, a MIREOT
                     extract with an upper-terms file, two injects, a remove and two seds.
  slme SUBSET    3   ROBOT reaches that extraction through ExtractOperation.extractSubset rather
                     than the module extractor this uses. Falling back to BOT would write a
                     different module and say nothing.
  mirror         2   The module IS the mirrored ontology. ODK's rule for it has no term list
                     prerequisite at all - so NFDIcore's bfo_terms.txt is a file its own build
                     never opens, and reporting it MISSING would send somebody to write a list
                     nothing reads.
  filter         1   ODK extracts BOT and then removes the axioms outside the base IRIs. Without
                     the removal the module comes out larger than the repository's.

Every one of those is ODK's own rule for that module_type, said in words. The worst outcome
available here is a module that looks right, differs from the one the repository holds, and says
nothing about the difference.

EVERY DEFAULT IS QUOTED FROM ODK, NOT GUESSED

The source resolution is Makefile.jinja2's download-mirror- rule: mirror_from if given, else the
use_variant path under the product's own directory, else $(OBOBASE)/<id>.owl, plus .gz when
use_gzipped. The inherited slme defaults are ImportGroup's field initialisers in odkcore/model.py
- module_type "slme", module_type_slme "BOT", slme_individuals "include" - and the
product-inherits-group rule is its derive_fields, including fast_slme normalising to slme.

Checked against a real ODK-generated Makefile rather than taken on trust: a bare `- id: iao`
became `curl -L $(OBOBASE)/iao.owl` and `extract ... --individuals include --method BOT`, and a
product declaring STAR with individuals excluded got its own rule saying exactly that.

TWO STATES A DIRECTORY SCAN CANNOT SEE

DECLARED AND ABSENT. A product in the YAML with nothing built for it - exactly where 1.97.0's
"Add to a list..." leaves you. None of the four projects is in this state, but every user who adds
a product is, until they run an extraction.

ON DISK AND UNDECLARED. A module in imports/ that no product names. ODK builds its IMPORTS
variable from import_group.products, so `make refresh-imports` and `make all_imports` never touch
that file and nothing regenerates it. Found in three of the four: nfdicore's schema (commented out
of its products while both files sit in imports/), mwo's foaf, ecto's iao and ons.

AND ONTOBOARD DOES THIS TO ITSELF

OdkScaffold writes

    import_group:
      products: []

into every project the plugin generates, and ROBOT > Import terms... writes the module, the term
list and the catalog entry without adding the product. So a repository built entirely with this
plugin has imports that ODK's own build does not know about: IMPORTS is empty, and
`make refresh-imports` in somebody's CI rebuilds nothing, silently.

The result says so, naming OntoBoard as the cause. Fixing it means making Import terms... declare
the product, which needs a YAML operation that can seed an EMPTY list - and OdkYaml.appendTo
deliberately refuses an empty one, because an empty sequence is written both as `key: []` and as a
key with nothing under it, and the two need different edits. That is its own release, and the
roadmap now says so in those terms.

A REGRESSION I WROTE AND THEN CAUGHT

The first draft rebuilt only declared products. That would have taken the rebuild away from every
project OntoBoard made - the ones whose term lists DO carry a "# Source:" line, which is the only
place the old path ever worked. An undeclared module with a recorded source is still rebuilt, with
the ODK default method, exactly as before.

It was caught by extracting the merge out of the Swing action into ImportProducts.audit, which is
pure and tested. The mutation that deletes the undeclared rebuild now fails a test that says so in
its name.

NUMBERS

1846 tests, 0 failures, 0 skipped. 30 new, counted three ways and agreeing (surefire sum 1846,
anchored @Test 1846).

All 30 were green on their first run, which in this project is a smell rather than a result:
1.97.0's receipt is headed "TWO DEFECTS IN MY OWN CODE, BOTH CAUGHT BY THE TESTS ON THEIR FIRST
RUN", and a suite that passes immediately has proved nothing about itself. So twelve mutations
were applied to the implementation and each had to fail something:

  no .gz suffix                              1 failure
  fast_slme not normalised                   1
  SUBSET falls back to BOT                   2
  group defaults ignored                     1
  product does not override its group         3
  filter and minimal share a reason          1
  undeclared never rebuilds (the regression) 1
  mirror is asked for a term list            1
  rows returned in reverse order             2
  NO_SOURCE collapsed into REFUSED           1
  undeclared gets no method                  1
  declared-but-absent reads as rebuildable   1

Twelve applied, twelve caught. One thirteenth attempt caught nothing and was my own fault: the
mutation added a row and removed it again, so it changed nothing. Replaced with a real reversal,
which fails two tests.

38/38 classes named in plugin.xml load on both hosts. Quality report end to end: 6 findings, 2 of
them errors. 163 patterns indexed.

The host self-test exercises the new path on an empty project - "No imports. This project declares
none in import_group.products, and there is nothing under src/ontology/imports" - and the four
real projects were run through the compiled audit directly, which agreed to the row with an
independent tally written in Python from the same YAML files.

STILL OPEN

Making Import terms... declare the product, above. release_artefacts and primary_release, which
mean three content variants rather than three serialisations. Item 3: the pattern library knows
nothing about what you have already imported, so a recommendation scoring 1.00 means you already
contain the whole pattern without saying so. And, from the other roadmap: pull requests, Widoco,
entity locking, and the nine axiom kinds the live collaboration protocol cannot carry.
